Characterizing biofilm thickness, density, and microbial community composition in a full-scale hybrid membrane aerated biofilm reactor  Narasimman Lakshminarasimman   a , *   , Michelle M. McKnight   b   , Josh D. Neufeld   b , Wayne Parker   a  a   Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, University of Waterloo, Ontario N2L 3G1 Canada  b   Department of Biology, University of Waterloo, Waterloo, Ontario N2L 3G1, Canada  H I G H L I G H T S   G R A P H I C A L   A B S T R A C T  •   Biofilm   characteristics   were   similar within a full length MABR cord.  •   Biofilm   thickness   and   community composition varied along tank length.  •   Thick biofilms at the front had a higher abundance of anaerobic bacteria.  •   Thin biofilms at tank rear had a higher abundance of nitrifying bacteria.  •   Nitrification   rate   was   significantly correlated   with   biofilm   thickness   and nitrifier abundance.  A R T I C L E   I N F O  Keywords:  MABR  Biofilm thickness  Nitrification rate  Microbial community analysis  A B S T R A C T  This study examined biofilm thickness, density, and microbial composition in a full-scale MABR treating municipal wastewater, focusing on their spatial and operational variability. The MABR cassette arrangement created a thickness gradient, with biofilms in the front cassettes more than twice as thick as those at the back. Lower scouring intensity due to reduced airflow resulted in thicker biofilms. Microbial communities varied longitudinally and by operational phase, with thicker biofilms having a higher relative abundance of anaerobic microorganisms, such as fermenters and sulfur reducers, and fewer aerobic nitrifiers.   Nitrosomonas   were the main ammonia oxidizers, while   Nitrospira   and   Ca.   Nitrotoga dominated as nitrite oxidizers. The 16S RNA gene profiles showed strong correlations with biofilm thickness (R 2   =   0.8) and nitrification rates (R 2   =   0.4). Full-scale MABR biofilm characteristics have not been studied before. Study findings have practical implications for better modeling practices and improved design of future MABR facilities.  *   Corresponding author.  E-mail address:   nlakshmi@uwaterloo.ca   (N. Lakshminarasimman).  Contents lists available at   ScienceDirect  Bioresource Technology  journal homepage:   www.elsevier.com/locate/biortech  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biortech.2025.132207  Received 11 December 2024; Received in revised form 24 January 2025; Accepted 7 February 2025  Bioresource   Technology   423   (2025)   132207  Available   online   8   February   2025  0960-8524/©   2025   The   Author(s).   Published   by   Elsevier   Ltd.   This   is   an   open   access   article   under   the   CC   BY-NC-ND   license   ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-  nc-nd/4.0/ ).
1.   Introduction  Membrane aerated biofilm reactors (MABR) are engineered to have high surface area to volume ratios to maximize the biofilm inventory and   thereby   increase   reaction   rates   and   reduce   process   footprints ( Qureshi et al., 2005 ). Biofilms are complex and dynamic biological structures where a variety of microorganisms and their associated products are embedded in a matrix of extracellular polymeric substances (EPS) that is immobilized on a surface ( Boltz et al., 2017 ). Redox gra -  dients and microbial stratification that are established in MABR biofilms due to counter-diffusion of substrates enable simultaneous nitrification and denitrification for concurrent carbon and nitrogen removal ( Martin  &   Nerenberg, 2012 ). Hence, the extent of macroscale carbon and ni -  trogen removal can be influenced by both substrate transport and bio -  logical activity in biofilms. There is however limited information that links the macro-scale performance of MABRs with   meso -scale biofilm features and microbial community composition in full scale systems. Increased information in this regard could be employed to inform design and operating practices that purposefully influence biofilm development for optimized treatment processes ( Morgenroth and Milferstedt, 2009 ).  Biofilm thickness control is essential for effective operation of bio -  film reactors because excessively thin biofilms will be biomass limited, whereas overly thick biofilms can limit substrate diffusion ( S ø rensen   &  Morgenroth, 2023 ). In co-diffusional biofilm treatment systems, such as moving bed biofilm reactors (MBBR), biofilm thicknesses in the range of 200 – 500   μ m have been found to achieve similar levels of ammonium removal ( Piculell et al., 2016 ). This is because nitrification occurs in the outer layers of the biofilm, which has direct contact with the oxygen and ammonium supply from the bulk phase. In contrast, nitrification in MABRs has been found to be influenced by biofilm thickness because of the counter-diffusional geometry, where NH 4   and O 2   diffuse from the bulk and the membrane sides, respectively, and nitrification occurs in the innermost layers of the biofilm. Low nitrification rates and process failures have been reported for bench-scale MABRs that have high bio -  film thickness ( Semmens et al., 2003 ). Similarly, bench-scale biofilm- only MABRs have reported a reduction in the TN removal rate when high scouring rates that promote thin biofilms were employed ( Bunse et al., 2023; Mehrabi et al., 2020 ). Thus, air scouring of MABR systems has profound impacts on biofilm thickness and resulting pollutant removal performance. There is however little information regarding the impact of airflow on biofilm thickness in full scale MABRs, where process air is recirculated to establish shearing conditions in the bulk phase and agitate the membrane fibers to slough off excess biofilm growth ( Peeters et al., 2017 ).  Biofilm thickness can also indirectly impact reactor performance by shaping microbial community structure and function. The biofilm im -  pacts diffusion of substrates such as dissolved oxygen (DO), chemical oxygen   demand   (COD),   and   various   nitrogen   (N)   species,   thereby creating substrate gradients that serve as unique niches for microbial stratification ( Stewart   &   Franklin, 2008 ). Thus, thicker biofilms could potentially harbor a more diverse microbial community with heteroge -  neous functions. In co-diffusional MBBR processes thicker biofilms were found to have increased richness, evenness, and Shannon index values when compared to thinner biofilms ( Suarez et al., 2019; Torresi et al., 2016; Zhao et al., 2022 ). However, thin biofilms with high DO provided a competitive advantage for ammonia-oxidizing bacteria (AOB) over nitrite-oxidizing bacteria (NOB) for partial nitritation in MBBR reactors ( Piculell et al., 2016 ). There is less information on the impact of biofilm thickness on microbial community composition and function of counter diffusional MABR biofilms. Although prior studies have characterized the MABR biofilm microbial community under intermittent aeration ( Pellicer-N ` acher et al., 2014 ), different influent loading conditions ( Tian et al., 2015 ), and varied C/N ratios ( Liu et al., 2010 ), the impact of biofilm thickness on MABR microbial community composition and functionality remains unexplored.  The current knowledge of biofilm characteristics in wastewater treatment processes is largely based on co-diffusional biofilm systems. The few studies that have focused on MABRs have utilized small-scale systems fed with synthetic wastewaters, which do not represent actual mixing and shearing hydrodynamics, or the substrate complexity of full- scale systems. In order to address this knowledge gap, this study explored the degree of heterogeneity in biofilm properties of a full-scale MABR system with long membrane cords (up to 2 m), large membrane surface areas (10 4 -10 5   m 2 ), and arrangement within a plug flow tank. This research had three objectives: i) characterize biofilm thickness as a function of location and operating conditions ii) characterize microbial community composition and functionality in the MABR biofilms over similar conditions; and iii) examine relationships between MABR nitri -  fication   performance,   biofilm   thickness,   and   microbial   community composition and predicted function. These objectives were achieved by sampling   and   characterizing   the   biofilm   at   selected   locations   and operating conditions of a full-scale MABR facility. As such, the novelty of this research lies in the generation of a unique dataset on the biofilm thickness, microbial community composition, and putative functions of full-scale   MABR   biofilms   and   correlating   them   with   the   process performance.  2.   Methodology  2.1.   Sampling strategy  The study site was originally a conventional activated sludge plant that was recently upgraded with a hybrid MABR process upstream of the aeration tank. The plant layout is shown in   Fig. S1   in supplemental in -  formation (SI I). The plant is rated for an average flow of 9,320 m 3 /d and is operated with an overall suspended sludge solids retention time of 5 – 6 days. The MABR process consisted of four parallel tanks (21.4 m long   ×   2.4 m wide   ×   3.1 m deep   ×   4 tanks   =   637 m 3 ) maintained under anoxic redox conditions that received influent wastewater and return activated sludge (RAS) streams. Each of the four tanks housed nine ZeeLung MABR cassettes (Veolia Water Technologies, Oakville, Canada) arranged in a row, summing to a total surface area of 69,120 m 2 . The process air supplied through the membrane lumen to provide oxygen for the biofilm was recycled back into the bulk mixed liquor periodically for tank mixing and shearing off excess biofilm growth. The exhaust air from the lumen was collected in accumulators located at the bottom of the full-scale MABR cassettes. Once the accumulators were filled, the process air was periodically discharged in a burst into the bulk. Since the process and scouring air supplies were linked, increasing process airflow also increased scouring flow rates and reduced the time interval between successive scouring events ( Table 1 ). However, the scouring duration (time duration of air discharge into the bulk   =   approximately 2 s) remained unchanged as the same volume of air accumulated at different airflows.  This study characterized biofilm properties of the full-scale MABR when operating at airflows of 6 normal litres (NL) m     2   hr -1   during phases 1 and 4, and 4.5 NL m     2   hr -1   in phase 3. The phase numbers designated   here   are   consistent   with   a   complementary   study ( Lakshminarasimman and Parker, 2025 ) that reported nitrification and denitrification performance of the same MABR plant. There were four sampling events: November 2022 (middle of phase 1), April 2023 (end of phase 3), May 2023 (beginning of phase 4), and October 2023 (end of phase 4), reflecting two levels of scouring intensity, seasonal tempera -  ture changes, and biofilm maturity conditions ( Table 1 ). During each membrane harvesting campaign, cassettes representing the front, mid -  dle, and rear sections were sampled to capture the longitudinal profile of the biofilm ( Table 1 ). During phase 4b, membrane samples from co- located cassettes in parallelly operating tanks were collected to eval -  uate whether biofilm characteristics were different among the tanks.  To collect membrane samples, full-scale cassettes were lifted from the tanks using a crane. Cassettes were placed on the ground to drain excess water and then sprayed with secondary effluent to remove any  N. Lakshminarasimman et al.   Bioresource   Technology   423   (2025)   132207  2
loosely held material. Sampled cords were selected after visual inspec -  tion to ensure they were representative of the respective cassette and then cut at the top and bottom using ethanol-sterilized scissors. The remaining cord ends (about 15 cm at either end) were resealed to pre -  vent air leakage from the cassettes. Each harvested cord was cut into five equivalent 30 cm segments using ethanol-sterilized scissors: top, mid- top, mid, mid-bottom, and bottom. Each of the five segments was further cut in half for biofilm thickness and microbial community ana -  lyses. The segments designated for biofilm thickness analysis were placed inside sterile vials containing phosphate buffer saline (PBS) so -  lution to preserve the structural integrity of biofilm samples and then stored at 2 °C   until analysis. The biofilm samples designated for micro -  bial community analysis were collected in sterile 15 mL Falcon tube and stored at       20 °C   until analysis.  2.2.   Biofilm physical characterization  Biofilm thickness measurements were performed to gain insights into variations among different cassettes in a tank, paired cassettes in parallel tanks, and operating conditions (phases). The thickness measurements were obtained from biofilm scans using optical coherence tomography (OCT). The OCT analysis is well suited for studying mesoscale biofilm structures because it is fast, can capture images at high resolution, is non-invasive, and does not require sample preparation ( Wagner   &   Horn, 2017 ). Biofilm imaging was conducted using a Ganymede Series SD-OCT Systems (Thorlabs, Germany), with a 930 nm wavelength. The biofilm scans were obtained in the two-dimensional longitudinal direction along the membrane fiber with an axial resolution of 4   μ m. The biofilm thickness measurements from the OCT scans were obtained using Fiji software (v. 2.16.0) ( Schindelin et al., 2012 ). The image processing in Fiji involved adjusting the brightness and contrast using the auto feature to ensure the membrane at the base of the biofilm was distinctly visible. The perpendicular distance between the membrane and the biofilm was measured manually using the   “ measure ”   function within the software at 50 randomly selected locations along the length of the membrane. Biofilm dry density was also measured to evaluate effects of cassette location and operational changes on the biofilm. The detailed procedure of density measurement is outlined in SI I.  2.3.   Microbial community analysis  The biofilm microbial community composition and functionality were characterized to gain insight into how spatial and operating con -  ditions impacted their development. Total DNA was extracted from a 1 cm cord segment of the membrane using the DNeasy PowerSoil Pro Kit (Qiagen)   following   the   manufacturer ’ s   protocol,   with   some   minor modifications   ( McKnight   and   Neufeld,   2024 ).   Extracted   DNA   was quantified with the Qubit dsDNA HS Assay (ThermoFisher Scientific) and DNA purity was assessed using a NanoDrop 2000 (ThermoFisher Scientific) to ensure minimal protein or RNA contamination. Sample extracts were stored at       20 °C   until further analysis. The microbial community composition was characterized by amplifying the V4-V5 regions of the 16S rRNA gene using universal primers 515F-Y and 926R following previously published protocols ( Bartram et al., 2011; McKnight   &   Neufeld, 2024 ). Raw DNA sequence data are available on the NCBI Sequence Read Archive under the BioProject accession num -  ber: PRJNA1104605.  The ASV table, rarefied to a depth of 10,000 reads, was used to calculate alpha diversity indices to serve as quantitative indicators for evaluating the microbial community composition within and between samples. Three   α   diversity indices were calculated using the diversity function from the R vegan package (v. 2.6 – 4): ASV richness, evenness (Pielou ’ s J), and Shannon index. Principal coordinate analysis (PCoA) using the Bray-Curtis dissimilarity index was performed using AOViz platform (https://github.com/AlexUmbach/AOViz) to study the vari -  ability of community composition between different samples. A triplot was   also   created   with   the   AOViz   platform   using   the   Bray-Curtis dissimilarity metric to understand the relationship between taxonomic abundance, biofilm thickness, and nitrification rate measured during the sampling week. Normalization of data prior to calculation of Bray-Curtis dissimilarity was done using scaling with ranked subsampling (SRS) at a depth of 10,000 ( Beule   &   Karlovsky, 2020 ).  Raw ASV data were processed through a Functional Annotation of the Prokaryotic Taxa (FAPROTAX) analysis (v. 1.2.7) to predict the putative functions of the identified ASVs based on 16S rRNA gene se -  quences ( Louca et al., 2016 ). The FAPROTAX database employed in this study included modifications to accommodate taxonomic changes to the naming of nitrifying organisms present in SILVA database release 138 that are not present in the current FAPROTAX database (shown in SI II).  2.4.   Statistical analysis  This   study   adopted   various   statistical   tests   to   compare   biofilm thickness within and between samples. The variability in the biofilm thickness within a single OCT scan obtained for a membrane segment (N  =   50) was ascertained by the coefficient of variation (COV) (Equation  (1) .  COV   =   σ s  μ s  *100%   (1)  σ s =   Sample standard deviation of 50 measurements within a mem -  brane segment ( μ m).  μ s   =   Average of 50 thickness measurements within a membrane segment ( μ m).  When comparing biofilm thickness between samples, each mem -  brane segment was considered as an independent sample and the average of the 50 measurements taken within each segment was used as its   representative   thickness   (t i ).   The   thickness   values   of   the   five  Table 1  Sampling scheme and operating conditions during biofilm harvesting. Cells marked with X show the cassettes lifted during a sampling event.  Operational conditions   Phase 1   Phase 3   Phase 4a   Phase 4b  Monthly average temperature   ±   standard deviation ( °C )   17.3   ±   1.1   13.3   ±   1.0   16.0   ±   0.9   19.9   ±   0.7  Process air flow(NL m -2   hr -1 )   6.0   4.5   6.0   6.0  Scouring air flow(NL min -1 )   190.0   145.0   190.0   190.0  Time between successive scouring events (seconds)   80.0   110.0   80.0   80.0  Location   Cassette   Tank 4   Tank 4   Tank 2   Tank 3   Tank 4   Tank 3   Tank 4  Front   C1   X   X   X   X  C2   X   X  C3  Middle   C4   X  C5   X   X   X   X  C6   X   X  Rear   C7  C8   X   X  C9   X   X   X   X  N. Lakshminarasimman et al.   Bioresource   Technology   423   (2025)   132207  3
segments were found to be normally distributed in all the cassettes sampled during all the operating conditions based on a Shapiro-Wilk Test ( α   =   0.05). Hence, parametric tests were performed to study the variance between two or more samples.  The variability in thickness along a full-length cord was assessed by comparing the average biofilm thickness between the five cut segments in the different cassettes sampled. To do so, the segment averages within a cord (N   =   5) were normalized (Equation   (2)   to a notionally common scale (     1 to   +   1) for easy visualization of the thicknesses measured over a large range (100 – 1000   μ m).  Normalized average   =      t i       t average  )  t max       t min  (2)  t i   =   Representative thickness of a membrane segment ( μ m).  t average   =   Average thickness of the five membrane segments being compared ( μ m).  t max   =   Maximum thickness of the five membrane segments being compared ( μ m).  t min   =   Minimum thickness of the five membrane segments being compared ( μ m).  The biofilm thickness at different locations of a tank (front, middle, and rear cassettes), and between different operating conditions, were compared using one-way ANOVA and Tukey ’ s post-hoc tests ( p   =   0.05). Thicknesses on co-located cassettes in different MABR trains were compared using a Welch ’ s T-test for comparison of samples with un -  equal variance. The relative percentage difference (RPD) was also esti -  mated to quantify the degree of variability in thickness between the MABR trains.  The three   α   diversity metrics calculated based on the ASV data were compared among different samples to infer changes in diversity. The variability of the metric between the five segments of a full-length cord was assessed through the COV within the data set (N   =   5) using equation  (1) . The five membrane segments of the full-length cord were treated as independent sample replicates of a cassette. The normal distribution of the   α   diversity metrics of the five segments was confirmed by a Shapiro- Wilk Test ( α   =   0.05). The variation of the   α   diversity metrics between the three cassette locations was assessed through a one-way ANOVA test ( α  =   0.05).   The   variation   between   duplicate   cassettes   co-located   in different tanks was assessed through a Welch ’ s T-Test ( α   =   0.05). Similarly, the variation in relative abundance of predicted functional -  ities in biofilm samples from the front and rear cassettes was assessed using a Welch ’ s T-Test ( α   =   0.05). A permutational multivariate analysis of variance (PERMANOVA) test was performed to evaluate the signifi -  cant differences between the Bray-Curtis distances of biofilm samples between different cassette locations.  3.   Results and discussion  The overall objectives of this study were to characterize the biofilm thickness, density, and microbial community composition and function across different spatial scales and operating conditions to obtain further insights into factors impacting process performance. The MABR biofilm characteristics were systematically investigated at different segments of a membrane cord, along the length of the MABR tank, and between different phases. The biofilm density was in the range of 12 – 278 kg dry solids m     3   and there was no significant difference in the values across the length of the tank or different phases ( p   >   0.05; detailed discussion in SI I).  3.1.   Local spatial variations in biofilm thickness  The   biofilm   thickness   measurements   composited   across   all   the sampling events were initially reviewed to establish the overall range of values observed in the study. The thickness measurements spanned across two orders of magnitude from a minimum value of 90   μ m to values above the maximum measurable thickness limit (MMT;   > 1000  μ m) and the median thickness across all the locations and operating conditions was 742   μ m ( Fig. S2   in SI I). Over one-third of all the har -  vested samples had thickness values greater than the MMT and were not included in subsequent statistical comparisons within and between biofilm samples ( Table S1   in SI I).  The uniformity of biofilm thickness values within each membrane segment (N   =   50) was examined by assessing COV values ( Fig. S3   in SI I). The COV values ranged between 7 % and 44 % with a median value of 16 %. A Pareto analysis indicated that 80 % of the samples had a COV less than 21 %. Because there was low variability in the biofilm thickness measured within   the segments, the mean of the 50 readings was employed in subsequent analyses when evaluating the variability of biofilm thickness between different samples.  Membranes in the MABR cassettes had a length of 1.9 m and were intermittently sparged with air that was released at the base of the cassettes. It was anticipated that the biofilm on the bottom segments would be thinner than the top ones due to their proximity to the initial burst of the sparging gas at the base. To test this hypothesis, the normalized average biofilm thickness (Equation   (1)   of the five segments of the full-length cords from different sampling times and locations were examined ( Fig. 1 ). Membrane cords that reported thickness   >   MMT were not   included   in   this   analysis.   Results   showed   that   there   was   no discernable trend in the normalized averages for the membrane cords sampled in the middle and rear locations of the tank ( Fig. 1 ). The lack of a systematic change in biofilm thickness from the top to the bottom segments suggests that differences in shearing intensity along the length of the cords did not influence the biofilm thickness. Because of this lack of systematic variation, the individual segments from a cord were treated as replicate samples for which average and standard deviation values were calculated for subsequent analyses.  The MABR process consisted of four tanks operating in parallel and hence the biofilm thicknesses measured during phase 4b for cassettes in the same longitudinal positions in tanks 3 and 4 were compared to assess the reproducibility of tanks ( Fig. 2 ). The biofilm thicknesses in the front cassettes of both tanks were all greater than the MMT, so a comparison of these cassettes was not conducted. Although the thickness values of the middle (C5) and rear (C9) cassettes in the two tanks were found to be significantly different ( p   <   0.05), the magnitude of the differences was modest (RPD   =   18 % and 21 %, respectively). The relatively small dif -  ference in biofilm thickness between the parallel operating tanks at the corresponding   locations   likely   had   minimal   impact   on   process performance.  3.2.   Longitudinal spatial variation in biofilm thickness  The full-scale MABR process had four parallel trains, each with a length to width ratio of 9:1 indicating plug flow mixing conditions ( USEPA, 1998 ). Each of these trains housed nine MABR cassettes ar -  ranged in a single row along the tank length. Such a cassette arrange -  ment within a plug flow tank was expected to create a longitudinal substrate gradient and influence biomass growth along the length of tank. To assess these gradient effects biofilm thickness was measured at the front (C1), middle (C5), and rear cassettes (C9) were compared for each phase of the study to assess whether longitudinal location affected biofilm thickness ( Fig. 3 ). In phase 1, biofilm thickness decreased significantly along the tank from front to back ( p   <   0.05), with the average biofilm thickness at the back of the tank (286   ±   30   μ m) about 50 % lower than the front (595   ±   269   μ m). In phase 4, the biofilm thickness was greater than the MMT in the front cassettes and decreased to ~ 670   μ m in the middle and back cassettes in phase 4a ( Fig. 4 ). In phase 4b, the corresponding values were 698   ±   129   μ m and 335   ±   93  μ m (OCT images of phase 4b shown as example in   Fig. S4   in SI I). Biofilm thicknesses exceeded MMT for most samples during phase 3 and hence a longitudinal trend could not be inferred. Overall, biofilm thickness profiles   from   three   out   of   the   four   sampling   events   displayed   a  N. Lakshminarasimman et al.   Bioresource   Technology   423   (2025)   132207  4
longitudinal thickness gradient that favored thinner biofilms in the rear end of the tank. It was anticipated that such a thickness differential could have significant impacts on microbial community and by exten -  sion C and N removal activities along the tank.  Biofilm thicknesses reflect the net result of the biomass growth rate that is enabled by substrate availability and the rate of biofilm detach -  ment controlled by erosional forces ( Horn et al., 2003 ). In this study system, it was assumed that shearing was consistent along the length of the MABR tank, while substrate loading and microbial growth rates decreased from the front to the back of the tank, due to plug flow con -  ditions. The thicker biofilm in the front of the tank suggests that the higher growth rates from the increased substrate availability predomi -  nated over the erosion rate. In contrast, the lower substrate loading at the back of the tank likely led to the observed thinner biofilms, reflecting a lower biomass growth rate relative to the erosion rate. Hence, a design change to consider for future installations could include increasing shearing intensities for the front cassettes to maintain thin biofilms along the length of the tank, minimizing overall diffusional resistances.  3.3.   Impact of air flow on biofilm thickness  The MABR airflow can influence shearing conditions in the bulk ( Peeters et al., 2017 ) and hence biofilm thickness measurements were compared   between   operational   phases   with   different   scouring   in -  tensities. For this analysis, biofilm thickness values from cassettes located at the back of the tanks were compared, as they were within the measurable range during all sampling events. In this regard, biofilms established under the lowest and highest air flow conditions employed  Fig. 1.   Normalized average biofilm thickness versus cord location for different tank locations and operational conditions.  Fig. 2.   Comparison of biofilm thickness between tank 3 and tank 4 of the full-scale MABR process during phase 4b. Error bars indicate standard deviation (N   =   5).  N. Lakshminarasimman et al.   Bioresource   Technology   423   (2025)   132207  5
in phase 3 (4.5 NL m     2   hr -1 ) and phases 1 and 4 (6 NL m     2   hr -1 ), respectively, were compared. Three samples from phase 3, which had a lower air flow, had a significantly higher average thickness of at least 819   ±   69   μ m ( p   <   0.05, N   =   3) when compared to the biofilm thickness observed at the higher air flow employed in phases 1 and 4 (285 – 667  μ m), while two segments from phase 3 had thickness   >   MMT. Hence, a 25 % increase in airflow resulted in a 20 – 65 % reduction in biofilm thickness, confirming that at full scale the operational airflow has a strong influence on biofilm thickness.  Because phases 1 and 4 represented warm-weather operations at the higher airflow setting (6 NL m     2   hr -1 ), the thickness values obtained for these phases were examined to determine whether thickness was pri -  marily dependent on temperature and air flow ( Fig. 4 ). The biofilm thickness differed between the three operating phases, with the lowest average thickness (285   ±   30   μ m) observed in phase 1 ( Fig. 4 ). This was attributed to early sampling conducted only two months after MABR comissioning while the biofilm was still developing. Further, phase 4a had a significantly higher average thickness (667   ±   142   μ m) when compared to 4b (396   ±   44   μ m) ( p   <   0.05). The sampling event for phase 4a was conducted one month after beginning operation at the high airflow, whereas phase 4b samples were collected after six months of operation. The decrease in thickness between phase 4a and 4b was attributed to the prolonged exposure to high shearing conditions, with higher   flow   suggesting   that   a   considerable   period   of   operation   is required before biofilm thickness changes. These results indicate that the biofilm is a dyanmic entity where temporal changes in thickness can occur during its initial formation and the operations thereafter.  Overall, when all the spatial, operational, and temporal trends are considered, the MABR cassette location, process airflow, and the dura -  tion of exposure to a given operating condition appear to strongly in -  fluence biofilm thickness. In comparison, the variability within a full- length fiber and between co-located cassettes in different tanks was minimal.  3.4.   Biofilm microbial community composition  Biofilm thickness may govern microbial community composition and function, which would in turn dictate pollutant removal performance  Fig. 3.   Biofilm thickness along the length of the MABR tank for different operational conditions. Error bars indicate standard deviation (N   =   5). Front, middle, and rear categories indicate the location of the sampled cassette in the full-scale MABR tank.  Fig. 4.   Comparison of biofilm thickness measured in rear cassettes (N   =   5) during different phases of operation.  N. Lakshminarasimman et al.   Bioresource   Technology   423   (2025)   132207  6
( Suarez et al., 2019 ). Therefore, the composition and encoded functions of MABR microbial communities were assessed. A comparison of alpha diversity between different segments of a full-length cord, along the length of the tank, and between tanks revealed that there were no sig -  nificant differences among the samples for richness, evenness, and Shannon index metrics ( p   >   0.05,   Fig. S6 ). However, even though two samples can have the same alpha diversity measure, they can still differ in their microbial community ( Ramette, 2007 ).  The microbial community profiles across different segments of the full-length cords were compared by principal component analysis using Bray-Curtis dissimilarity. In general, the biofilm samples from the different cassette segments taken from the full-length cords of tank 4 grouped close to each other for all three sampling events ( Fig. 5 ), sug -  gesting that microbial community composition was similar along the length of each cord. However, the top two segments of cassette 1 in phase 1 were distinct from the three lower segments ( Fig. 5 A). Similarly, microbial communities from cassettes 4 and 5 during phase 3 had a wider   sample   distribution   ( Fig.   5 B).   Despite   these   inconsistencies, overall,   Bray-Curtis   dissimilarity   analysis   suggested   that   microbial communities along the full-length of cords were consistent.  The variation of microbial communities in MABR biofilms was investigated   with   respect   to   the   cassette   location   to   explore   the  Fig. 5.   Principal coordinate analysis (PCoA) ordination graphs of Bray-Curtis dissimilarity for biofilm samples collected in tank 4 during phase 1 (a), phase 3 (b), phase 4a (c), and phase 4b (d). The shape of the markers refers to the different sample segments from top (S1) to bottom (S5). The color of the markers refers to the cassette location within tank 4.  N. Lakshminarasimman et al.   Bioresource   Technology   423   (2025)   132207  7
longitudinal variation in the microbial community composition. During phases 1 and 4a, samples representing front, middle, and rear cassettes in tank 4 grouped separately from each other, suggesting a difference in microbial community composition of the membrane biofilm along the length of the tank ( Fig. 5 A). A PERMANOVA test confirmed that the variations in the microbial community profiles from these samples were significantly different and about 50 % of the variability was attributable to cassette location (phase 1:   R 2   =   0.50,   p   <   0.001; phase 4:   R 2   =   0.55,   p  <   0.001). In contrast, phase 3 samples, which included consecutive cassettes located next to each other, showed grouping of samples from consecutive cassettes, including C1 and   C 2 and C4 and C5 ( Fig. 5 b). This suggests that while there was a longitudinal change in community profiles between different locations in the tank, the shift was gradual with some level of similarity between adjacent cassettes. However, when comparing front cassettes (C1,   C 2) with rear ones (C8, C9), the greater separation between the sample groups suggests that the biofilm communities were substantially different between the two ends of the tank. A PERMANOVA test for phase 3 revealed that the longitudinal trend in the microbial community was significant ( p   <   0.001) and the cassette location explained 37 % of the overall variation ( R 2   =   0.32). Overall, the biofilms from individual fibers had similar microbial com -  munity   composition,   whereas   biofilm   community   composition   was different between cassettes along the length of the MABR tank.  3.5.   Predicted functions of biofilm microbial communities  Predicted   biofilm   microbial   community   functions   for   different spatial and operational scales were investigated using inferences from 16S RNA gene data when compared to published information for cultured strains ( Louca et al., 2016 ). Front cassettes, which had the highest biofilm thicknesses in this study, were hypothesized to have a higher proportion of predicted anaerobic metabolic functions because of reduced oxygen availability ( Pellicer-N ` acher et al., 2013 ). As antici -  pated, taxa predicted to have fermentative functions made up a signif -  icantly higher proportion of the microbial community ( p   <   0.05) in C1 than C9 samples during phases 1 (C1   =   3.2   ±   1.0 % vs C9   =   1.2   ±   0.3 %), 3 (C1   =   7.7   ±   2.6 % vs C9   =   3.1   ±   0.7 %) and 4b (C1   =   4.6   ±   2.6 % vs C9   =   1.1   ±   0.2 %) ( Fig. 6 ). The higher prevalence of fermentative microorganisms could contribute to increased denitrification activity in the thicker biofilms due to greater availability of readily biodegradable COD. Similarly, ASVs with sulfur reduction functionalities were more abundant in profiles from cassettes with thick biofilms. The front cas -  settes had a significantly higher sulfur reduction functionality ( p   <   0.05) in phase 3 (4.6   ±   2.4 %) and phase 4b (6.1   ±   2.9 %), whereas this functionality was less prevalent in rear cassettes with thin biofilms ( <   1 %). Phase 1 biofilms did not show any predicted sulfur reduction me -  tabolisms ( Fig. 6 ), suggesting that sulfur reducing bacteria accumulated in the biofilms during phases 2 and 3 when influent loading to the MABR was high and the air flow was reduced (5.5 and 4.5 NL m     2   hr -1 , respectively). Overall, longitudinal variation of predicted fermentation and sulfur reduction functionalities suggested that thicker MABR bio -  films have higher abundances of organisms with putative anaerobic metabolisms.  Results from the FAPROTAX analysis were also examined to assess if differences in biofilm dissolved oxygen levels across the tank impacted predicted aerobic metabolisms of the biofilm communities. Aerobic heterotrophy was prevalent at relative abundances ranging from 3 to 15 % across all the biofilm cord samples (aerobic_chemoheterotrophy;  Fig. 6 ). In our previous study, oxygen utilization for BOD removal was calculated based on the difference between nitrification rates calculated using ammonia removal (NR NHX ) and oxygen transfer rate (NR OTR ) ( Lakshminarasimman and Parker, 2025 ) and the presence of aerobic heterotrophy in the biofilms was consistent with oxygen utilization calculations. Although, microorganisms performing aerobic heterotro -  phy were present at a significantly lower relative abundance in the front cassettes in phases 1 and 4b compared to the rear cassettes ( p   <   0.05;  Fig. 6 ), which could be explained by the thicker biofilms and lower oxygen penetration depth in the rear cassettes. Additional predicted functions were significantly more abundant in the thin biofilms associ -  ated   with   rear   cassettes   than   thick   biofilms   located   at   the   front, including aerobic ammonia oxidation during phases 1 and 3, aerobic nitrite oxidation in all phases, and nitrification during phase 1 and 3 ( p  Fig. 6.   Bubble plot of functionalities predicted using FAPROTAX analysis of MABR biofilm samples along the length of the tank during different phases. The color of the bubble indicates phases. Size of bubbles indicate the magnitude of relative abundance.  N. Lakshminarasimman et al.   Bioresource   Technology   423   (2025)   132207  8
<   0.05;   Fig. 6 ). Overall, these results indicate a strong relationship be -  tween biofilm thickness and predicted aerobic and anaerobic functions in the MABR biofilms.  Results from the full-scale performance monitoring in our previous study suggested that there was substantial denitrification occurring in the MABR process, so we also explored denitrification predictions for the MABR ( Lakshminarasimman and Parker, 2025 ). The FAPROTAX anal -  ysis   showed   taxa   with   predicted   nitrite   denitrification   and   nitrate denitrification metabolisms were present in all the biofilm samples at a similar relative abundance (0.1 – 1 %;   Fig. 6 ). The prevalence of pre -  dicted denitrification capabilities suggests there was a potential for  “ short cut ”   N removal through nitrite reduction in the biofilm microbial community. Similarly, taxa with nitrous oxide denitrification function -  ality were present at a relative abundance of 0.1 – 1 % across all biofilm samples, suggesting the MABR biofilms may have consumed nitrous oxide generated from biological nitrogen removal pathways. The pres -  ence of N 2 O reduction functionality was in agreement with our findings from a separate modeling study that revealed net N 2 O consumption via heterotrophic denitrification pathway all along the full-scale MABR tank ( Lakshminarasimman et al., 2025 ).  3.6.   Nitrifier composition of MABR biofilms  Enhanced nitrification, enabled by the counter-diffusion of sub -  strates, is one of the main advantages of the MABR process. So, we explored the presence of both AOB and NOB in the MABR using 16S rRNA gene sequencing. Several taxa from the   Nitrosomonas   genus were identified as the main ammonia oxidizers in the biofilm samples, and  Nitrospira   and   Nitrotoga   genera were identified as dominant nitrite oxi -  dizers ( Fig. S7 ). These genera are commonly observed nitrifiers in activated sludge ( Ahn et al., 2008 ), MBBRs ( Zhao et al., 2022 ), and in lab-scale ( Bunse et al., 2023; Downing   &   Nerenberg, 2008a; Mehrabi et al., 2020; Ukaigwe et al., 2023 ) and full-scale ( Uri-Carre  ̃ no et al., 2023; Zhao et al., 2023 ) MABR processes. Subsequent metagenomics analysis of the MABR samples also confirmed that some of the   Nitrospira  ASVs   detected   were   complete   ammonia   oxidizing   (comammox)  Fig. 7.   A) longitudinal distribution of dominant aob and nob asvs in the mabr biofilm samples across different operational phases. relation between biofilm thickness and b) aob and c) nob asv relative abundance.  N. Lakshminarasimman et al.   Bioresource   Technology   423   (2025)   132207  9
bacteria, which is further discussed in a separate study ( McKnight, 2025 ).  Relative abundances of AOB and NOB ASVs were evaluated along the length of the full-scale tank to assess whether there were correlations between   longitudinal   thickness   gradients   and   nitrifier   abundance ( Fig. 7 a). An overall increase in the relative abundance of nitrifying bacteria (AOB and NOB) was detected from the front to rear cassettes in all phases studied ( Fig. 7 a). The longitudinal trend in nitrifier relative abundance may result from the variation in biofilm thickness along the tank and between phases. Thicker biofilms result from growth of het -  erotrophs at the exterior of the biofilm where COD concentrations are higher ( Downing   &   Nerenberg, 2008b ), which could effectively   “ dilute ”  the observed nitrifier proportion in the community by increasing the total number of microorganisms in the biofilm. Whereas thinner biofilms with greater oxygen penetration have a relatively smaller heterotrophic fraction,   compared   to   the   nitrifiers.   However,   additional   absolute quantification of nitrifiers using quantitative PCR would help to clarify this observation. For nitrifiers in phase 3, their decreased relative abundances were attributed to the increase in biofilm thickness present along the entire length of the tank during this phase ( Fig. 7 a).  Nitrifier relative abundance was further examined as a function of biofilm thickness to identify the favorable thickness range for MABR operations. Nitrifier relative abundance showed distinct patterns in two thickness ranges ( Fig. 7 b and c). When the biofilm thickness ranged between 400 – 1000   μ m, the relative abundance of nitrifiers was very low ( < 0.05 %). In contrast, when biofilm thickness was between 200 – 400  μ m,   Nitrosomonas   ( Fig. 7 b) and   Ca.   Nitrotoga and   Nitrospira   ( Fig. 7 c) relative abundances increased with decreasing thickness. Overall, this suggests that 200 – 400   μ m may be a suitable thickness range to maximize ammonia removal in the MABR process.  The relative abundance of nitrifiers was compared between the operational phases to assess whether factors other than biofilm thickness affected their abundance.   Ca.   Nitrotoga was present in relative abun -  dances up to 4.8 % in phase 1, 1.4 % in phase 3, and 1 % in phase 4a, but was low ( < 0.5 % RA) in phase 4b ( Fig. 6 ). The low abundance of   Ca.  Nitrotoga in phase 4b was inconsistent with the thin biofilm thicknesses, suggesting other factors may be influencing their prevalence. As   Ca.  Nitrotoga is a temperature sensitive nitrite oxidizer that is typically enriched in the temperature range of 10-17 °C   ( Alawi et al., 2009; Kitzinger et al., 2018 ), their low prevalence in phase 4b at an operating temperature of 20 °C   and elevated abundances in remaining phases with operating temperatures in the range of 14-17 °C   was consistent with their cold adaptative nature. Conversely, several   Nitrospira   species including  Nitrospira defluvii   were present at higher abundance in phase 4b when compared to phase 1, which had a similar airflow but a slightly lower temperature. The variation in temperature sensitivity of nitrite oxidizers has been previously reported ( Lantz et al., 2021; Ravishankar et al., 2022; Wegen et al., 2019 ). However, such trends were not observed in the ammonia oxidizer communities. Overall, the results suggest that while biofilm thickness plays an important role in nitrifier abundance in the MABR biofilms, the selection of nitrite oxidizers might be influenced by other factors such as temperature.  3.7.   Relating biofilm thickness, microbial community, and nitrification rate  Biofilm microbial community composition indicated a strong inter -  dependence between MABR airflow, biofilm thickness, and biofilm community composition. Hence, the impact of these dynamics at the micro- (microbial community) and   meso -scales (biofilm thickness) of the biofilm on the overall process performance (nitrification rate) at the macro scale was investigated. To explore the relationship between these variables, we conducted a triplot analysis that correlated the Bray-Curtis dissimilarity of 16S RNA gene profiles with specific nitrifier taxa, biofilm thicknesses, and MABR nitrification rates of tank 4 samples ( Fig. 8 ). The results showed that both biofilm thickness and MABR nitrification rates were significantly correlated with microbial community composition ( p  <   0.05;   Fig. 8 ). Among the two factors, biofilm thickness ( R 2   =   0.80) had a stronger correlation with the overall microbial community profile than MABR nitrification rate ( R 2   =   0.43). The opposing direction of the two vectors indicates an inverse relation between them, suggesting higher nitrification rates were favored by thinner biofilms. Examining the po -  sition of the taxa bubbles, dominant nitrifier ASVs affiliated with  Nitrosomonas   and   Nitrospira   were   located   near   phase   4b   samples, whereas   Ca.   Nitrotoga and other   Nitrosomonas   ASVs were located close to phase 1 samples. This suggests that nitrifier relative abundance was greater in microbial communities of biofilms with low thickness, sup -  ported   by   high   airflow   during   phases   1   and   4b,   which   further  Fig. 7.   ( continued ).  N. Lakshminarasimman et al.   Bioresource   Technology   423   (2025)   132207  10
emphasizes the importance of optimal biofilm thickness control in full- scale MABR processes.  3.8.   Implications of the findings  This study explored the spatial and operational variability of the physical and microbial community characteristics of biofilm from full- scale MABR facility. By doing so, this study addressed a critical knowl -  edge gap and generated a unique dataset on full-scale MABR biofilm characteristics. Based on the findings presented here, there are two main recommendations for future design and operation of full-scale MABRs. Firstly, the prevalence of a longitudinal gradient in biofilm thickness along a plug flow MABR tank observed in this study has important im -  plications for modeling of MABR processes. Prior simulation of full-scale MABR processes has typically assumed a constant biofilm thickness for the full tank volume ( Carlson et al., 2021; Elsayed et al., 2021; Flores- Alsina et al., 2023; He   &   Daigger, 2023; Houweling et al., 2018; Schraa et al., 2018 ). Although this assumption may be valid for MABR installations with only a single cassette, constant biofilm thickness as -  sumptions must be reconsidered when investigating full-scale MABR process with multiple cassettes. When modeling a long row of cassettes within a plug flow tank, simulating the MABR process as multiple re -  actors with varying biofilm thickness will be a better modeling practice. Secondly, the longitudinal variation in biofilm thickness and microbial function has implications for future design of biofilm thickness control in full-scale MABRs. When the MABR is situated in an upstream position in the secondary treatment process that receives a higher organic loading, employing a more intensive biofilm thickness control at the front end of the MABR process may be beneficial to curb the prevalence of undesirable sulfate reduction, which has previously shown to limit nitrite oxidation and increase N 2 O production ( Delgado Vela et al., 2021; Delgado Vela et al., 2022 ). Maintaining thinner biofilms at the front of the tank could also improve the overall nitrification rate in the MABR process. Thus, a tapered biofilm thickness control design could be advantageous for MABR installations of this nature to maximize nitri -  fication and denitrification in full-scale applications.  4.   Conclusion  This study examined biofilm thickness and microbial community composition in a full-scale MABR system, focusing on spatial and operational dynamics. Biofilms in the front cassette were thicker than those at the back and varied with operational shearing intensity. There was a longitudinal variation in microbial community composition with a higher relative abundance of anaerobic functionalities such as fermen -  tation and sulfate reduction in the front.   Nitrosomonas   were primary ammonia oxidizers, while   Nitrospira   and   Ca.   Nitrotoga dominated as nitrite oxidizers. Thinner biofilms had more nitrifiers, correlating with higher nitrification rates. Optimizing airflow to control biofilm thick -  ness could improve nitrification in MABR systems.  CRediT authorship contribution statement  Narasimman Lakshminarasimman:   Writing   –   review   &   editing, Writing   –   original draft, Visualization, Methodology, Formal analysis, Data curation, Conceptualization.   Michelle M. McKnight:   Writing   –  review   &   editing, Writing   –   original draft, Visualization, Validation, Methodology,   Investigation,   Formal   analysis,   Data   curation,  Fig. 8.   Triplot analysis of 16S RNA gene profiles in the MABR biofilm samples using the Bray-Curtis dissimilarity index. The individual MABR biofilm samples are represented by marker points, with marker color indicating phase and shape representing cassette location. ASVs associated with known AOB and NOB genera present at average relative abundance greater than 0.5 % are shown with labelled black circles. Size of circles represents average relative abundance of the ASV across all samples, while their location within the ordination space reflects the correlation of the ASV with different samples. The values in the axis labels show the proportion of overall variation within the samples described by the two principal components.  N. Lakshminarasimman et al.   Bioresource   Technology   423   (2025)   132207  11
Conceptualization.   Josh D. Neufeld:   Writing   –   review   &   editing, Su -  pervision, Resources, Funding acquisition, Conceptualization.   Wayne Parker:   Writing   –   review   &   editing, Supervision, Resources, Project administration, Funding acquisition, Conceptualization.  Declaration of competing interest  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.  Acknowledgements  We would like to thank the operational team at the study site for assistance and logistical support for this research. The authors would like to thank Sondus Jamal and Natasha Prepas-Strobeck for their sup -  port with biofilm harvesting activities. This research work was funded by a Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC) Alliance Grant in partnership with the Regional Municipality of Waterloo, Ontario Clean Water Agency, Veolia Water Technologies, Stantec, and inCTRL Solutions Inc.  Appendix A.   Supplementary data  Supplementary data to this article can be found online at   https://doi. org/10.1016/j.biortech.2025.132207 .  Data availability  Data will be made available on request.  References  Ahn, J.H., Yu, R., Chandran, K., 2008. Distinctive microbial ecology and biokinetics of autotrophic ammonia and nitrite oxidation in a partial nitrification bioreactor.  Biotechnol. Bioeng.   100 (6), 1078 – 1087. https://doi.org/10.1002/bit.21863.  Alawi, M., Off, S., Kaya, M., Spieck, E., 2009. Temperature influences the population structure of nitrite-oxidizing bacteria in activated sludge.   Environ. Microbiol. Rep.   1 (3), 184 – 190. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1758-2229.2009.00029.x.  Bartram, A.K., Lynch, M.D.J., Stearns, J.C., Moreno-Hagelsieb, G., Neufeld, J.D., 2011. Generation of multimillion-sequence 16S rRNA gene libraries from complex microbial communities by assembling paired-end illumina reads.   Appl. Environ. Microbiol.   77 (11), 3846 – 3852. https://doi.org/10.1128/AEM.02772-10.  Beule, L., Karlovsky, P., 2020. Improved normalization of species count data in ecology by scaling with ranked subsampling (SRS): Application to microbial communities.  PeerJ   8, e9593 .  Boltz, J.P., Smets, B.F., Rittmann, B.E., van Loosdrecht, M.C.M., Morgenroth, E., Daigger, G.T., 2017. From biofilm ecology to reactors: A focused review.   Water Sci. Technol.   75 (8), 1753 – 1760. https://doi.org/10.2166/wst.2017.061.  Bunse, P., Orschler, L., Pidde, A.V., Lackner, S., 2023. Effects of scouring on membrane aerated biofilm reactor performance and microbial community composition.  Bioresour. Technol.   369, 128441. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biortech.2022.128441.  Carlson, A.L., He, H., Yang, C., Daigger, G.T., 2021. Comparison of hybrid membrane aerated biofilm reactor (MABR)/suspended growth and conventional biological nutrient removal processes.   Water Sci. Technol.   83 (6), 1418 – 1428. https://doi.org/ 10.2166/wst.2021.062.  Delgado Vela, J., Bristow, L.A., Marchant, H.K., Love, N.G., Dick, G.J., 2021. Sulfide alters microbial functional potential in a methane and nitrogen cycling biofilm reactor.   Environ. Microbiol.   23 (3), 1481 – 1495. https://doi.org/10.1111/1462- 2920.15352.  Delgado Vela, J., Gordon, K.J., Klatt, J.M., Dick, G.J., Love, N.G., 2022. Integrated modeling and lab-scale investigations demonstrate the impact of sulfide on a membrane aerated biofilm reactor.   ACS ES & T Water   2 (12), 2388 – 2399. https://doi. org/10.1021/acsestwater.2c00253.  Downing, L.S., Nerenberg, R., 2008a. Effect of oxygen gradients on the activity and microbial community structure of a nitrifying, membrane-aerated biofilm.  Biotechnol. Bioeng.   101 (6), 1193 – 1204. https://doi.org/10.1002/bit.22018.  Downing, L.S., Nerenberg, R., 2008b. Total nitrogen removal in a hybrid, membrane- aerated activated sludge process.   Water Res.   42 (14), 3697 – 3708. https://doi.org/ 10.1016/j.watres.2008.06.006.  Elsayed, A., Hurdle, M., Kim, Y., 2021. Comprehensive model applications for better understanding of pilot-scale membrane-aerated biofilm reactor performance.  J. Water Process Eng.   40, 101894. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jwpe.2020.101894.  Flores-Alsina, X., Uri-Carreno, N., Nielsen, P.H., Gernaey, K.V., 2023. Modelling the impacts of operational conditions on the performance of a full-scale membrane aerated biofilm reactor.   Sci. Total Environ.   856, 158980. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. scitotenv.2022.158980.  He, H., Daigger, G.T., 2023. The hybrid MABR process achieves intensified nitrogen removal while N 2 O emissions remain low.   Water Res.   244, 120458. https://doi.org/ 10.1016/j.watres.2023.120458.  Horn, H., Reiff, H., Morgenroth, E., 2003. Simulation of growth and detachment in biofilm systems under defined hydrodynamic conditions.   Biotechnol. Bioeng.   81 (5), 607 – 617. https://doi.org/10.1002/bit.10503.  Houweling, D., Long, Z., Peeters, J., Adams, N., C ˆ ot  ́ e, P., Daigger, G., Snowling, S., 2018. Nitrifying below the ‘Washout ’   SRT: Experimental and modelling results for a hybrid MABR/activated sludge process.   Proc. Water Environ. Fed.   2018 (16), 1250 – 1263. https://doi.org/10.2175/193864718825137944.  Kitzinger, K., Koch, H., Lücker, S., Sedlacek, C.J., Herbold, C., Schwarz, J., Daebeler, A., Mueller, A.J., Lukumbuzya, M., Romano, S., Leisch, N., Karst, S.M., Kirkegaard, R., Albertsen, M., Nielsen, P.H., Wagner, M., Daims, H., 2018. Characterization of the first   “ Candidatus   Nitrotoga ”   isolate reveals metabolic versatility and separate evolution of widespread nitrite-oxidizing bacteria.   MBio   9 (4). https://doi.org/ 10.1128/mbio.01186-18.  Lakshminarasimman, N., Parker, W., 2025. Long-term monitoring reveals improvements in nitrogen removal and energy efficiency with MABR upgrade at full scale. J. Water Process Eng. 70, 106945. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jwpe.2025.106945.  Lakshminarasimman, N., Zamanzadeh, M., Schraa, O., Parker, W., 2025. Modeling nitrous oxide emission from full-scale hybrid membrane aerated biofilm reactors (MABR). Water Res. 274, 123128. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.watres.2025.123128.  Lantz, M.A., Boddicker, A.M., Kain, M.P., Berg, O.M.C., Wham, C.D., Mosier, A.C., 2021. Physiology of the nitrite-oxidizing bacterium   Candidatus   Nitrotoga sp. CP45 enriched from a Colorado River.   Front. Microbiol.   12. https://doi.org/10.3389/ fmicb.2021.709371.  Liu, H., Yang, F., Shi, S., Liu, X., 2010. Effect of substrate COD/N ratio on performance and microbial community structure of a membrane aerated biofilm reactor.  J. Environ. Sci.   22 (4), 540 – 546. https://doi.org/10.1016/S1001-0742(09)60143-1.  Louca, S., Parfrey, L.W., Doebeli, M., 2016. Decoupling function and taxonomy in the global ocean microbiome.   Science   353 (6305), 1272 – 1277. https://doi.org/10.1126/ science.aaf4507.  Martin, K.J., Nerenberg, R., 2012. The membrane biofilm reactor (MBfR) for water and wastewater treatment: Principles, applications, and recent developments.   Bioresour. Technol.   122, 83 – 94. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biortech.2012.02.110.  McKnight, M.M., Neufeld, J.D., 2024. Comammox   Nitrospira   among dominant ammonia oxidizers within aquarium biofilter microbial communities.   Appl. Environ. Microbiol.  90 (7), e00104 – e00124. https://doi.org/10.1128/aem.00104-24.  McKnight, M. M. (2025). Microbial ecology of nitrification in engineered water treatment systems. [PhD Dissertation, University of Waterloo]. UWSpace. https:// hdl.handle.net/10012/21381.  Mehrabi, S., Houweling, D., Dagnew, M., 2020. Establishing mainstream nitrite shunt process in membrane aerated biofilm reactors: Impact of organic carbon and biofilm scouring intensity.   J. Water Process Eng.   37, 101460. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. jwpe.2020.101460.  Morgenroth, E., Milferstedt, K., 2009. Biofilm engineering: Linking biofilm development at different length and time scales. Rev. Environ. Sci. Bio/Technol. 8 (3), 203 – 208. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11157-009-9163-1.  Peeters, J., Adams, N., Long, Z., C ˆ ot  ́ e, P., Kunetz, T., 2017. Demonstration of innovative MABR low-energy nutrient removal technology at Chicago MWRD.   Water Pract. Technol.   12 (4), 927 – 936. https://doi.org/10.2166/wpt.2017.096.  Pellicer-N ` acher, C., Domingo-F  ́ elez, C., Lackner, S., Smets, B.F., 2013. Microbial activity catalyzes oxygen transfer in membrane-aerated nitritating biofilm reactors.  J. Membr. Sci.   446, 465 – 471. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.memsci.2013.06.063.  Pellicer-N ` acher, C., Franck, S., Gülay, A., Ruscalleda, M., Terada, A., Al-Soud, W.A., Hansen, M.A., S ø rensen, S.J., Smets, B.F., 2014. Sequentially aerated membrane biofilm reactors for autotrophic nitrogen removal: microbial community composition and dynamics.   J. Microbial. Biotechnol.   7 (1), 32 – 43. https://doi.org/ 10.1111/1751-7915.12079.  Piculell, M., Welander, P., J  ̈ onsson, K., Welander, T., 2016. Evaluating the effect of biofilm thickness on nitrification in moving bed biofilm reactors.   Environ. Technol.   37 (6), 732 – 743. https://doi.org/10.1080/09593330.2015.1080308.  Qureshi, N., Annous, B.A., Ezeji, T.C., Karcher, P., Maddox, I.S., 2005. Biofilm reactors for industrial bioconversion processes: Employing potential of enhanced reaction rates.   Microb. Cell Fact.   4 (1), 24. https://doi.org/10.1186/1475-2859-4-24.  Ramette, A., 2007. Multivariate analyses in microbial ecology.   FEMS Microbiol. Ecol.   62 (2), 142 – 160. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1574-6941.2007.00375.x.  Ravishankar, H., Nemeth, A., Massons, G., Puig, D., Zardoya, D., Carpi, N., Lens, P.N.L., Heffernan, B., 2022. Factors impacting simultaneous nitrification and denitrification in a membrane aerated biofilm reactor (MABR) system treating municipal wastewater.   J. Environ. Chem. Eng.   10 (5), 108120. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. jece.2022.108120.  Schindelin, J., Arganda-Carreras, I., Frise, E., Kaynig, V., Longair, M., Pietzsch, T., Preibisch, S., Rueden, C., Saalfeld, S., Schmid, B., Tinevez, J.-Y., White, D.J., Hartenstein, V., Eliceiri, K., Tomancak, P., Cardona, A., 2012. Fiji: An open-source platform for biological-image analysis.   Nat. Methods   9 (7). https://doi.org/10.1038/ nmeth.2019.  Schraa, O., Alex, J., Rieger, L., Miletic, I., 2018. Dynamic modeling of membrane-aerated biofilm reactors.   Proc. Water Environ. Fed.   2018 (16), 1297 – 1312. https://doi.org/ 10.2175/193864718825137935.  Semmens, M.J., Dahm, K., Shanahan, J., Christianson, A., 2003. COD and nitrogen removal by biofilms growing on gas permeable membranes.   Water Res.   37 (18), 4343 – 4350. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0043-1354(03)00416-0.  N. Lakshminarasimman et al.   Bioresource   Technology   423   (2025)   132207  12
S ø rensen, K. H.,   &   Morgenroth, E. (2023). Biofilm reactors. In: Chen, G., Van Loosdrecht, M. C. M., Ekama, G. A., Brdjanovic, D.,   Biological Wastewater Treatment - Principles, Modelling and Design . International Water Association. Doi: 10.2166/ 9781789060362_0813.  Stewart, P.S., Franklin, M.J., 2008. Physiological heterogeneity in biofilms.   Nat. Rev. Microbiol.   6 (3), 199 – 210. https://doi.org/10.1038/nrmicro1838.  Suarez, C., Piculell, M., Modin, O., Langenheder, S., Persson, F., Hermansson, M., 2019. Thickness determines microbial community structure and function in nitrifying biofilms via deterministic assembly.   Sci. Rep.   9 (1). https://doi.org/10.1038/ s41598-019-41542-1.  Tian, H.-L., Zhao, J.-Y., Zhang, H.-Y., Chi, C.-Q., Li, B.-A., Wu, X.-L., 2015. Bacterial community shift along with the changes in operational conditions in a membrane- aerated biofilm reactor.   Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol.   99 (7), 3279 – 3290. https://doi. org/10.1007/s00253-014-6204-7.  Torresi, E., Fowler, S.J., Polesel, F., Bester, K., Andersen, H.R., Smets, B.F., Pl  ́ osz, B.G., Christensson, M., 2016. Biofilm thickness influences biodiversity in nitrifying MBBRs — Implications on micropollutant removal.   Environ. Sci. Tech.   50 (17), 9279 – 9288. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.est.6b02007.  Ukaigwe, S., Zhang, Y., Lee, K., Liu, Y., 2023. Structural and microbial dynamics analyses of MABR biofilms.   J. Environ. Eng.   149 (12), 04023085. https://doi.org/10.1061/ JOEEDU.EEENG-7438.  Uri-Carre  ̃ no, N., Nielsen, P.H., Gernaey, K.V., Wang, Q., Nielsen, U.G., Nierychlo, M., Hansen, S.H., Thomsen, L., Flores-Alsina, X., 2023. The effects of low oxidation- reduction potential on the performance of full-scale hybrid membrane-aerated biofilm reactors.   Chem. Eng. J.   451, 138917. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. cej.2022.138917.  USEPA. (1998).   Technical Support Document for Evaluation of Thoroughly Mixed Biological Treatment Units . https://www3.epa.gov/airtoxics/nsps/socww/guidfn.pdf.  Wagner, M., Horn, H., 2017. Optical coherence tomography in biofilm research: a comprehensive review.   Biotechnol. Bioeng.   114 (7), 1386 – 1402. https://doi.org/ 10.1002/bit.26283.  Wegen, S., Nowka, B., Spieck, E., 2019. Low temperature and neutral pH define  “ Candidatus   Nitrotoga sp. ”   as a competitive nitrite oxidizer in coculture with Nitrospira defluvii.   Appl. Environ. Microbiol.   85 (9), e02569 – e02618. https://doi.org/ 10.1128/AEM.02569-18.  Zhao, J., Ni, G., Piculell, M., Li, J., Hu, Z., Wang, Z., Guo, J., Yuan, Z., Zheng, M., Hu, S., 2022. Characterizing and comparing microbial community and biofilm structure in three nitrifying moving bed biofilm reactors.   J. Environ. Manage.   320, 115883. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jenvman.2022.115883.  Zhao, X., Xie, Y., Sun, B., Liu, Y., Zhu, S., Li, W., Zhao, M., Liu, D., 2023. Unraveling microbial characteristics of simultaneous nitrification, denitrification and phosphorus removal in a membrane-aerated biofilm reactor.   Environ. Res.   239, 117402. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envres.2023.117402.  N. Lakshminarasimman et al.   Bioresource   Technology   423   (2025)   132207  13
