Life cycle assessment of hydrogenotrophic denitrification in membrane aerated biofilm reactors for sustainable wastewater treatment  Rui Li   a , b , c , 1 , Ming-yi Lu   a , b , 1 , Rong-bo Guo   a , b , Haoran Duan   d , Bing-jie Ni   d , Shan-fei Fu   a , b , *  a   Shandong Engineering Research Center for Biogas, Qingdao New Energy Shandong Laboratory, Qingdao Institute of Bioenergy and Bioprocess Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Qingdao 266101, PR China  b   Shandong Energy Institute, Qingdao 266101, PR China  c   University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, PR China  d   School of Civil and Environmental Engineering, University of New South Wales, Sydney, NSW 2052, Australia  A R T I C L E   I N F O  Keywords:  Membrane aerated biofilm reactors  Hydrogenotrophic denitrification  Life cycle assessment  A B S T R A C T  The conventional anaerobic-anoxic-oxic (AAO) process for wastewater treatment is associated with high energy consumption and pollutant emissions due to its reliance on heterotrophic denitrification. In contrast, membrane aerated biofilm reactors (MABR) coupled with hydrogenotrophic denitrification (H 2 -MABR) offers a more promising alternative. This study conducts a life cycle assessment (LCA) to evaluate the environmental and economic benefits of H 2 -MABR compared to traditional AAO processes. Results indicate that even with a limited reactor life, the application of MABR in actual wastewater treatment plants can yield over 30 % reduction in environmental and economic impacts. Using CO 2   from biogas as a carbon source significantly reduces carbon emissions during the anaerobic stage, while the efficient nitrogen removal minimizes the need for wastewater recirculation and electricity consumption. The H 2 -driven denitrification process also avoids emissions and sec -  ondary pollution risks associated with organic electron donors. Furthermore, coupling H 2 -MABR with renewable energy source and Power-to-Gas technology further enhances sustainability by ensuring a stable hydrogen supply. Given the significant potential of H 2 -MABR for improving wastewater treatment, further research and large-scale implementation are highly encouraged.  1.   Introduction  The increasing burden of nitrate removal on wastewater treatment plants (WWTPs) due to excessive fertilizer use, industrial production, and human activities has highlighted the limitations of conventional nitrogen remove processes ( Gong et al., 2024 ). Anaerobic-Anoxic-Oxic Process (AAO process) is widely used in WWTPs attribute to its simple procedure and easy operation ( Wang et al., 2019 ), during which het -  erotrophic denitrifying bacteria reduce NO 3 -N to N 2   using organic car -  bon sources in the anoxic tank, simultaneously removing organic carbon from the wastewater ( Zhang et al., 2024a ). However, low concentrations of COD in the influent and the consumption of organic matter in the anaerobic tank greatly limit the supply of carbon sources ( Lei et al., 2023 ), which requires external carbon sources like acetic acid salts and ethanol to meet the demand for nitrogen removal ( Zhang et al., 2024b ). The production and utilization of these commercial organic carbon sources can contribute over 20 % to the carbon footprint of wastewater treatment and bring high cost ( Qu et al., 2024 ). Additionally, conven -  tional WWTPs account for approximately 3 % of global electricity con -  sumption,   even   becoming   the   primary   energy   consumers   in   some regions ( Lu et al., 2018 ). Therefore, implementation of alternative car -  bon sources for more sustainable denitrification process is among the top priorities for WWTPs.  In comparison, hydrogenotrophic denitrifying bacteria, which use H 2  as the electron donor and CO 2   as the carbon source, present a novel approach for denitrification in wastewater treatment ( Karanasios et al.,  Abbreviations:   AAO, anaerobic-anoxic-oxic ;   MABR, membrane aerated bioreactor ;   LCA, life cycle assessment ;   WWTP, wastewater treatment plant ;   COD, chemical oxygen demand ;   P2G, power to gas.  *   Corresponding author.  E-mail address:   fusf@qibebt.ac.cn   (S.-f. Fu).  1   These authors contribute same to this work.  Contents lists available at   ScienceDirect  Water Research  journal homepage:   www.elsevier.com/locate/watres  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.watres.2024.122529  Received 9 August 2024; Received in revised form 20 September 2024; Accepted 25 September 2024  Water   Research   267   (2024)   122529  Available   online   26   September   2024  0043-1354/©   2024   Elsevier   Ltd.   All   rights   are   reserved,   including   those   for   text   and   data   mining,   AI   training,   and   similar   technologies.
2010 ). Substituting inorganic carbon sources for organic ones prevents residual organic pollutants in water, and the lower biomass accumula -  tion rate of these bacteria enhances the controllability of the denitrifi -  cation process. If free CO 2   from anaerobic pond is utilized directly, it is possible to establish an intrinsic carbon sequestration cycle, thereby effectively reducing carbon emissions. Furthermore, H 2   serves as a cleaner energy source and electron donor, avoiding secondary pollution caused by other inorganic (Sulfates, iron compounds, etc.) or organic electron donors ( Di Capua et al., 2019 ).  Although, the low solubility of H 2   in water has traditionally led to significant wastage in autotrophic denitrification supported by con -  ventional bioreactors ( Di Capua et al., 2019 ). Membrane aerated biofilm reactors (MABRs) address this issue by allowing gases to pass directly through diffusion into the liquid phase ( Li et al., 2023 ). The autotrophic denitrifying bacteria on the aeration membrane form a biofilm layer that directly accepts hydrogen from the gas phase, facilitating material ex -  change with electron acceptors in the aqueous phase ( Rittmann, 2018 ). This counter-directional flow of electron donors and acceptors enhances the efficiency of mass transfer and supports low-energy operation. MABRs can introduce H 2   into the wastewater without generating bub -  bles, achieving a gas utilization rate as high as 100 % and preventing leaks ( Su et al., 2021 ). Furthermore, oxygen-based MABR can form a stratified biofilm, with the inner aerobic layer facilitating nitrification and   the   outer   anaerobic   layer   supporting   denitrification. Hydrogen-based MABR can directly utilize nitrate produced in the oxic tank   for   autotrophic   denitrification,   achieving   superior   nitrogen removal without the need for additional recirculation. This reduces energy consumption and minimizes the direct emission risk of N 2 O (the largest contributor to the carbon footprint) compared to the conven -  tional AAO process ( Lan et al., 2024 ).  Over the past 20 years, about 100 articles have been published that carried out Life Cycle Assessment (LCA) for WWTP. However, LCA of hydrogenotrophic denitrification MABR (H 2 -MABR) is still lacking. Such assessments could provide valuable references for the development of this promising technology ( Rashid et al., 2023 ). In this study, we con -  ducted an LCA based on the operational data from a specific wastewater treatment   plant   (AAO)   and   magnified   laboratory   experiments (H 2 -MABR) to predict the environmental footprint of the H 2 -MABR in real wastewater treatment processes. The results confirm that H 2 -MABR significantly enhance the environmental and economic benefits of AAO, providing   further   motivation   for   the   practical   engineering implementation.  2.   System boundaries and life cycle inventory  The life cycle assessment was conducted following the guidance of the International Organization for Standardization (ISO 14040 series). The ReCiPe 2016 v1.03 midpoint (H) method was utilized to evaluate 18 environmental   indicators.   This   method   assesses   the   environmental performance of a product through quantitative analysis of the environ -  mental impacts associated with each stage of its life cycle, including raw material extraction, production, transportation, usage, and end-of-life disposal.   It   offers   a   comprehensive   framework   for   environmental impact assessment that encompasses multiple indicators across various environmental   dimensions   ( Huijbregts   et   al.,   2017 ).   Furthermore, midpoint indicators facilitate understanding and comparison and can be  Fig. 1.   System boundary: a AAO Process; b H 2 -MABR Process. (The blue characters are intermediate products).  R. Li et al.   Water   Research   267   (2024)   122529  2
integrated with diverse normalization models. The system boundary for the life cycle of wastewater treatment is defined as shown in   Fig. 1   (The primary focus was on the secondary wastewater treatment process), with Ecoinvent serving as the background database.  Specifically, in the conventional AAO treatment process, wastewater is initially introduced into the anaerobic tank for COD removal and biogas production. To enhance methane production, the UASB (Upflow Anaerobic Sludge Bed) process was adopted instead of the traditional open-air anaerobic tank. The raw biogas is upgraded through scrubbing to produce high purity biomethane, with the resulting CO 2   directly emitted into the atmosphere. Subsequently, the wastewater flows into the anoxic tank where exogenous organic carbon sources facilitate denitrification to remove NO 3 -N. The wastewater then enters the oxic tank, where under the drive of O 2 , NH 3 -N is converted to NO 3 -N. Notably, the wastewater from the oxic tank is recirculated to the anoxic tank for denitrification. However, the dissolved O 2   carried by the recirculated liquid hinders denitrification efficiency, with recirculation rates typically reaching up to 300 % to meet discharge requirements ( Lan et al., 2024 ). The hydraulic retention time (HRT) is set to anaerobic tank: anoxic tank: oxic tank   =   1:1:3.  In comparison, the wastewater from the anaerobic tank in the H 2 - MABR system directly entered the aerobic tank, where NH 3 -N is con -  verted to NO 3 -N. After sedimentation in the secondary clarifier, which reduces the risk of membrane fouling, the effluent is directed to the MABR for hydrogenotrophic denitrification without requiring recircu -  lation ( Jiang et al., 2022 ). Additionally, the MABR is positioned down -  stream in the process to avoid the fouling caused by organic matter. The H 2   is sourced from water electrolysis, while the CO 2   is derived from the residues of biogas upgrading. Specifically, the raw biogas was upgraded by water scrubbing, and the dissolved CO 2   in the effluent was released through flashing and then reacted with MABR. The collected CO 2   was five times the demand for denitrification, and its high solubility also helped to improve its utilization efficiency, thus ensuring that the needs of wastewater treatment were met. The HRT is set to anaerobic tank: oxic tank: MABR   =   1:3:3  Starting from the inflow of the primary sedimentation tank, the following inflow parameters are set according to the actual engineering conditions: COD (Chemical Oxygen Demand)   =   320 mg/L, NH 3 -N   =   24 mg/L, NO 3 -N   =   8 mg/L. According to the Grade A standards of GB 18918-2002, the required effluent limits are: NH 3 -N   <   5 mg/L, TN   <   15 mg/L, COD   <   50 mg/L. The functional unit of this study is defined as a wastewater treatment plant with a processing capacity of 10,000 m 3 / day treating 10,000 m 3   of wastewater.  The life cycle inventory was shown in   Table 1 . The input and output of wastewater was set according to the actual WWTP in Tsingtao and the GB 18918-2002. The main building materials of tank such as body (concrete) and waterproof (polyurethane) were considered without other negligible materials such as electrical equipment and plumbing. The MABR was scaled up based on the previous experiment bioreactor. The liquid pump and aeration fan were the main operational equipment of wastewater treatment, so their loss was taken account in Based on data from the WWTP, the aeration rate of the oxic tank in the AAO is maintained at six times the liquid flow rate. It worth note that the H 2  supply of MABR is from water electrolysis. Apart from the traditional grid electricity source, solar and wind, mainly candidate of power to gas (P2G) ( Park et al., 2024 ), also be considered as the electricity source of H 2   production. For the other main process of the WWTP, the North China Grid Company was set as the electricity supplier. Because the advantage   of   promoting   microbial   adhesion   and   growth   has   been confirmed ( Lu et al., 2024 ), a polyester fiber-based planting fleece car -  rier was utilized to enhance the anti-fouling capability and formation efficiency of biofilms for the MABR, achieving a stable denitrification effect within 7 days. In fact, the polyester fibers outer layer was used as a standalone filler and was fixed in the gaps between the aerated mem -  branes. A daily air requirement of 600m 3   is necessary for performing reverse aeration cleaning on MABR. The life of the AAO system and MABR were respectively set at 30 years and 15 years ( Siagian et al., 2024 ). Additional details can be found in the supplementary materials. The direct carbon dioxide emissions from WWTPs are typically not considered significant contributors to global warming, as they are regarded as part of the natural carbon cycle ( Karakas et al., 2024 ).  3.   Results and discussion  3.1.   Impacts assessments  The   Recipe   Midpoint   (H)   method   calculates   18   environmental impact indexes.   Fig. 2   shows the 7 of the most concerned results with the contributions of every process and the life cycle cost analysis result. In most   environmental   impact   indicators,   emissions   from   the   liquid  Table 1  Life cycle inventory.  a) Input and output settings  COD   NH 3 -N   TN   SS   Ref.  Inflow   320 mg/L   24 mg/L   32 mg/L   180 mg/L   WWTP  Outflow   50 mg/L   5 mg/L   15 mg/L   10 mg/L   GB 18918-2002  b) Construction and fabrication  Description   Capacity   Characteristics   Source  Anaerobic Tank   10,000 m 3 /day   Infrastructure including digestion tanks and gas storage tanks.   Ecoinvent  Anoxic Tank   1250 m 3   Concrete pool body and polyurethane waterproof material.   WWTP  Oxic Tank   3750 m 3   Concrete pool body and polyurethane waterproof material.   WWTP  MABR   3750 m 3   Polypropylene membrane and stainless-steel support material.   Experiment  Biogas Scrubber   210 m 3   Fiberglass composite material.   ( Rasheed et al., 2022 )  Electrolyzer stack   1 MW   Polymer electrolyte membrane.   ( Litheko et al., 2023 )  c) Operations and maintenance  Description   Characteristic   Scenario   Source  AAO   MABR  Pumping (Liquid)   Water pump, 22 kW, 30 m 3 /h   80,000 m 3   50,000 m 3   Ecoinvent  Pumping (Gas)   Blower, 0.83 Kw, 120 m 3 /h   60,000 m 3   60,800 m 3   Ecoinvent  Biogas upgrading   Water scrubber   2214 kg   2214 kg   ( Rasheed et al., 2022 )  Carbon Source   Sodium acetate   1492 kg   N/A   Ecoinvent  Carbon dioxide (from biogas)   N/A   349 kg  Hydrogen   Water electrolysis by grid/solar/wind   N/A   46.85 kg   Ecoinvent / ( Litheko et al., 2023 )  Electricity   Electricity, medium voltage   59,510.56 kW.h   39,131.39 kW.h   Ecoinvent  R. Li et al.   Water   Research   267   (2024)   122529  3
pumping account for over 50 %. The complexity of conventional AAO processes   requires   wastewater to   pass through   multiple tanks and circulate to increase the nitrogen removal rate, resulting in significant electricity consumption ( Du et al., 2023 ) and pump wear. In the AAO process, the greenhouse gas emissions reached 8.02 kg CO 2   -eq/m 3 , with 90 % attributed to the electricity consumption ( Fig. 2 a). According to the United Nations, wastewater treatment is the main source of green -  house gas emissions, and 2 % of global carbon emissions come from WWTP ( Delanka-Pedige et al., 2021 ). While the operation and wear of water pumps release substantial amounts of organic pollutants and in -  crease the extraction of metal minerals. When H 2 -MABR is used for denitrification, it can save 34.3 % of electricity consumption and result in a carbon reduction of 38.4 % (4.94 kg CO 2   -eq/m 3 ), which has the potential to make a significant contribution to carbon neutrality. It is worth noting that LCA typically does not classify CO ₂   produced from cellular   metabolism   as   a   greenhouse   gas.   However,   the   acetate consumed in the heterotrophic denitrification process is derived from fossil fuels, not from the biogenic carbon-neutral cycle. Therefore, the direct CO ₂   emissions from the denitrification process in AAO could be considered, contributing an additional 0.12 kg CO ₂ -eq/m 3   to the carbon footprint, which will further demonstrate the advantages of H 2 -MABR.  In wastewater treatment dominated by AAO, to regulate the dis -  solved oxygen levels of every stage, the oxic tank (nitrification process) is typically positioned downstream from the anoxic tank (denitrification process) ( Han et al., 2021 ). This arrangement typically require addi -  tional reflux volume to meet the effluent requirements, resulting in an evident rise in the energy consumption ( Badza et al., 2020 ). In the context of hydrogenotrophic denitrification processes, the MABR can be placed downstream of the aerobic tank, and the ammonia nitrogen in the wastewater   undergoes   complete   nitrification   before   proceeding   to denitrification without the need for additional reflux. Therefore, the H 2 -MABR can reduce nearly 40 % of the hydraulic transportation burden in wastewater treatment processes, leading to a significant reduction in pollutant emissions from the intensive energy.  NO 3      +   0.84CH 3 COOH   →   0.08C 5 H 7 O 2 N   +   HCO 3      +   0.3CO 2   +   0.92H 2 O   +  0.46N 2   (1)  NO 3      +   3.0H 2   +   0.23CO 2   +   H +   →   0.48N 2   +   0.046C 5 H 7 O 2 N   +   3.4H 2 O(2)  The consumption of carbon sources is another process worth paying attention to, as it contributes 7 – 57 % ( Fig. 2 ) to the environmental footprint of conventional wastewater treatment. The AAO process em -  ploys heterotrophic denitrifying bacteria for denitrification, typically requiring the addition of acetate as an organic electron donor (Reactioin 1,   Mohseni-Bandpi et al., 1999 ). Following the release of the Action Plan for Preventing and Controlling Wastewater, a significant amount of commercial organic carbon sources has been depleted to adhere to stricter emission standards, resulting in an additional 0.3 Mt CO 2 -eq per year of emissions in China ( Qu et al., 2024 ). This practice not only re -  sults in additional CO 2   emissions but also leads to residual substances that may cause secondary pollution. Furthermore, the industrial syn -  thesis of acetates involves intricate acidification, catalysis, and crystal -  lization   reactions ( Martín-Espejo   et al., 2022 ), which   will   lead to significant environmental emissions. In the industrial production of acetic acid from methanol carbonylation, plenty of water is required to maintain the activity of rhodium-based catalysts ( Kalck et al., 2020 ), while the crystallization and recovery of the product generate a sub -  stantial volume of wastewater, both leading to high water consumption rate ( Fig. 2 b). In addition, as the rare heavy metal, excessive mining of rhodium and cerium can pose potential risks to ore reserves ( Fig. 2 c) and release pollutants. In the H 2 -MABR, H 2   serves as a cleaner electron donor than organic matter to drive denitrification reactions (Reaction 2,  Wu et al., 2018 ). Additionally, the lower ionization energy of H 2   ( Liu et al., 2012 ) makes it easier to release electrons compared to organic matter, without undergoing intermediate reactions, giving the denitri -  fication process a kinetic advantage. The abundant CO 2   from biogas in anaerobic tanks can serve as a cost-free carbon source for microbial growth and metabolism, while also preventing the direct greenhouse  Fig. 2.   LCA results of AAO and H2-MBAR wastewater treatment process: a, Global warming potential (GWP); b, Water consumption potential (WCP); c, Surplus ore potential (SOP); d, Marine eutrophication potential (MEP); e, Freshwater eutrophication potential (FEP); f, Terrestrial ecotoxicity potential (TETP); g, Freshwater ecotoxicity potential (FETP); h, Life cycle cost.  R. Li et al.   Water   Research   267   (2024)   122529  4
gases emission into the atmosphere after biogas scrubbing (Upgrading). It is noteworthy that MABR holds the potential to be directly coupled with the headspace of anaerobic tank, enabling simultaneous processes of autotrophic denitrification and biogas upgrading. This integration further eliminates the environmental emissions and economic costs associated with biogas pressurization and scrubbing.  3.2.   Uncertainty analysis (Monte Carlo simulation)  For AAO, all environmental impacts from construction do not exceed 2 % ( Fig. 2 ). This is attributed to the well-developed conventional wastewater treatment plants, where the equipment and tank structures are simple, reliable, and have a long service life. The life of MABR is unlikely to exceed that of a biological reaction tank constructed from poured concrete. Assuming a life of 15 years, the environmental impacts contributed by construction under 6 %. However, due to the current lack of long-term operational data for MABR at the engineering scale, its specific life remains puzzling and requires further discussion. It is worth to note that the membrane support structure, typically constructed from high-strength stainless steel, is still assigned a lifespan of 15 years. Therefore, the life discussed herein pertains solely to the aeration membrane and polyester fiber velvet, which can be designed for quick disassembly   to   facilitate   maintenance.   Taking   polypropylene,   a commonly used material in aeration membrane, as an example, its pri -  mary threats are ultraviolet radiation and oxygen, which accelerate material aging by inducing oxidation and chain breakage in polymer molecules ( Zjaci  ́ c et al., 2024 ). Microbial metabolism induced potential membrane   fouling   could   be   a   significant   variable   faced   by   poly -  propylene. Overall, the aging rate of polypropylene in the MABR will be evident lower than that exposed to light and air (2 years) ( Song et al., 2014 ), and regular maintenance measures are expected to significantly extend its life. For polyester fiber, due to its stronger resistance to light and oxidation, the life should not be shorter than that of polypropylene ( Haghdan and Smith, 2015 ).   Fig. 3 a and   Fig. 3 b displays the Recipe results normalized by Chinatax RCP   ( Liu et al., 2023 ) and considers the uncertainty   in   the   life   of   MABR   through   Monte   Carlo   simulation (Number of calculations: 1000). The life has an evident impact on TETP, FETP, HTPnc, and SOP, with some environmental emissions exceeding the AAO under extreme conditions. In consideration of the overall im -  pacts, even though the reactor and polyester fibers have a lifespan of only   0.5   years,   they   still   demonstrate   environmental   advantages compared to AAO. Upon reaching a life of 2 years, the reduction effi -  ciency of H 2 -MABR can approach approximately 40 % compared to AAO. Specifically, the life of MABR should not be less than 0.36 years to effectively reduce the environmental footprint of wastewater treatment plants ( Fig. 2 b). And it is essential to promote additional research aimed at   improving   the   anti-corrosion   and   reliability   of   MABR,   as   the enhancement of reliability under low life conditions is critical for minimizing emissions during the denitrification process. Furthermore, membrane components in MABR should be designed as independently detachable structures to prevent potential disruptions to the microbial community due to equipment maintenance or replacement. The cost analysis results indicate that savings of over 20 % can still be achieved at a life of 0.5 years, which further increases to 35 % at 2 years.  3.3.   Normalization analysis  The Chinatax RCP   normalization model represents the Chinese gov -  ernment ’ s willingness to address a specific environmental issue. There are only three indexes are worth noting in the monetization results: FETP, METP, and GWP, cumulatively contributing more than 97 % of the monetized value ( Fig. 3 a). While wastewater treatment processes emit significant amounts of greenhouse gases, the normalized factors of TETP are 10 times greater than GWP (Table S9), contributing the highest environmental costs. The normalized factor can reflect the government ’ s attitude towards a certain pollutant. TETP has always been the focus of  Fig. 3.   Monetization results of Recipe: a, The normalized results of 18 Recipe midpoint results; b, cumulative environmental impacts (The red arrows represent the emission reduction benefits and environmental advantages associated with different life, as well as the minimum life requirements for MABR based on these factors); c, Environmental risk Index caused by technological transformation; d, main pollutants in TETP and FETP; e, scenario analysis of hydrogen production through water electrolysis from various energy sources (Only LCA data of hydrogen production module was compared).  R. Li et al.   Water   Research   267   (2024)   122529  5
environmental governance in many countries, with the Stepwise model of 2008 estimating that it accounts for approximately 1 – 2 % of the GDPN ( Liu et al., 2023 ). The emissions value of FETP is not high, less than 2 % of GWP, but its monetized result is close to TETP. This is attributed to the Chinese government has made significant efforts in environmental   protection   taxes   to   reduce   pollutant   emissions   into freshwater bodies, leading to its normalized factor being among the highest ( Liu et al., 2023 ). Furthermore, FETP should be a key focus for wastewater treatment plants, as it reflects the risk of downstream water being recontaminated. Although the monetized results of GWP are less than one-tenth of TETP and FETP, due to the significant greenhouse gas emissions in the process and the current carbon neutral policies, it is still worthy of attention ( Qin et al., 2024 ).  From an analysis of the overall environmental impacts ( Fig. 3 b), it can be observed that the pumping of the liquid remains the primary emission source in the two processes, with a contribution of 28.3 % (2.13   € /m 3   wastewater) from reflux to AAO, which is avoided by MABR. Furthermore, acetate used to support denitrification in the AAO process contributes to over 20 % (1.55   € /m 3 ) of the environmental emissions during its production. For H 2 -MABR, the contribution from the supply of electron donor H 2   does not exceed 3 %, amounting to only 0.14   € /m 3 . The environmental impact of the consumption of carbon source can be largely ignored, as only a small amount of electricity is required to introduce   the   CO 2   collected   after   flash   evaporation   in   the   biogas upgrading stage into MABR. Overall, the cumulative environmental protection tax incurred by the AAO process amounted to 7.52   € /m 3 , whereas the utilization of H 2 -MABR can reduce the tax expenditure by at least 2.95   € /m 3 . It is worth noting that the above data are externality costs, which are monetized quantitative representations of the degree of environmental impact. They can also be internalized as cash flows in technical   economic   analysis,   thereby   revealing   the   economic   risks brought about by environmental impact ( Liu et al., 2023 ). If these environmental burdens are considered from an economic perspective, H 2 -MABR can save at least 3.23   € /m 3   in cost consumption (Include operation cost 0.28   € /m 3 ).  To further reveal the potential environmental risks associated with the transformation of the AAO technology to H 2 -MABR, the environ -  mental risk index indicators based on monetized results are shown in  Fig. 3 c (more detailed calculations can be found in the Supplementary Materials). The 18 environmental impact indicators derived from the Recipe Midpoint were further categorized into five distinct groups: human health, resource, water quality, soil quality, and air quality ( Liu et al., 2023 ). The five types of environmental risk factors are all below 1, indicating that the overall environmental risk following the technolog -  ical transition is manageable. In comparison to the other three factors, human health and soil quality warrant greater attention, as their risk factors may exceed 0.8. Notably, soil quality exhibits a heightened sensitivity in its response to MABR life. Under extreme conditions, this could result in a risk factor surpassing 1. Consequently, it is imperative to re-emphasize research aimed at enhancing the reliability and service life of MABR systems.  As shown in   Fig. 3 d, the emitted Copper Ion, Nickel II, Zinc II, Mercury II, and Vanadium V are the major contributors to TETP and FETP, with Copper Ion ’ s contribution exceeding 40 % in all cases. These pollutants are also major contributors to METP (Marine ecotoxicity potential) and the emissions are similar to FETP, but due to the current lack of prioritization of marine ecological environments, its normalized factor is only 0.017   € /kg 1,4-DB eq. Copper ions, as a typical heavy metal pollutant, can inhibit the growth, reproduction, and immune systems of animals, plants, and microorganisms in soil and water bodies, while causing significant damage to the human nervous system ( Bai et al., 2023 ). In addition to electricity, the wear of pumps in the AAO and H 2 -MABR processes also contributed vast copper ion release. Further -  more, sodium acetate produces more than 20 % of the copper ions, which can be avoided by H 2 -MABR.  3.4.   Hydrogen supply scenarios analysis  In the global electricity grid structure, thermal electricity still ac -  counts for over 50 %, leading to not only excessive exploitation of non- renewable resources but also the release of significant amounts of pol -  lutants ( Li et al., 2024 ). Hence, cleaner distributed power generation system is necessary to further reduce the environmental impact of high-energy   consumption   wastewater   treatment   processes.   For   the hydrogenotrophic denitrification, the production of H 2   is another pro -  cess of concern in addition to liquid pumping, which also leads to huge environmental emissions during the long wastewater treatment cycle. P2G (Power to Gas) aims to convert surplus electricity in the grid into combustible gases to achieve energy storage. Additionally, the tech -  nology also advocates for converting renewable electricity into flam -  mable gas to address its potential grid integration and transportation challenges ( Gahleitner, 2013 ). Thus, by integrating mature gas storage systems, P2G holds promise in providing a stable source of H 2   for hydrogenotrophic denitrification processes.  Wind and photovoltaic H 2   generation are compared because these two technologies are advocated for distributed generation systems in microgrid construction due to their flexibility ( Rani et al., 2024 ). Wind power stands out as the cleanest energy source, with the most noticeable environmental emission abatement benefits ( Fig. 3 e). However, wind turbine systems require significant amounts of iron, aluminum, copper, and other rare metals for constructing support structures and composite blades, leading to extensive mining activities. Moreover, the recycling rate of materials from decommissioned turbine systems is extremely low ( Morozovska et al., 2024 ), leading to substantial material wastage and further leading to a high SOP.  In comparison to wind power, solar electricity is more commonly coupled with water electrolysis H 2   production technology ( Zhang et al., 2023 ). This is because generating and storing energy during the day allows for water electrolysis at night, ensuring stable H 2   supply through this diurnal control mode. Although photovoltaic power also reduces environmental impacts from various perspectives, its high TETP and FETP pose as major disadvantages due to elevated normalization factors. This is attributed to the significant presence of heavy metal ion emis -  sions in the materials production of solar panels, metal electrodes, and throughout the supply chain ( Ma et al., 2023 ). In addition, higher water consumption is required to maintain the cleanliness and the efficiency of solar panels. Top priority should be given to enhancing the recycling rate of waste materials to further reduce emissions of pollutants and optimize resource utilization.  From the perspective of compatibility with WWTPs, wind power generation systems exhibit higher efficiency, greater cleanliness, and a smaller land footprint. In regions with sufficient wind resources, they can offer a more stable energy source compared to solar power. How -  ever, the noise generated and reliance on wind availability limit their applicability to WWTPs situated away from urban areas ( Arezes et al., 2014 ). Solar power generation is more appropriate for WWTPs situated in urban areas, as well as regions with limited wind resources. Due to the typically large footprint and predominantly flat architecture of WWTPs, this layout facilitates higher energy density for photovoltaic power generation and address the issue of extensive land occupation. However, the primary limitation of photovoltaic power generation is its vulnera -  bility to seasonal and weather variations, which can significantly reduce efficiency   during   summer   or   rainy   conditions   ( Sun   et   al.,   2020 ). Therefore, when selecting distributed power generation methods for WWTPs, it is essential to consider geographical factors to maximize the stability of energy production. The integration of various power gener -  ation   technologies   and   energy   storage   systems   holds   promise   for achieving a more stable and sustainable energy supply for WWTPs.  4.   Conclusion  The significant pollutant emissions from conventional wastewater  R. Li et al.   Water   Research   267   (2024)   122529  6
treatment processes contradict their environmental remediation objec -  tives. The H 2 -MABR provides a cleaner strategy by reducing energy consumption, saving chemicals, and converting carbon dioxide. This novel nitrogen removal approach holds promise for reducing the overall environmental emissions from wastewater treatment plants by over 30 %. Furthermore, it is suitable for coupling with renewable energy-based distributed generation and Power-to-Gas technology, further reducing energy consumption and emissions. More policy and economic support are needed to promote the industrial application research of H 2 -MABR.  CRediT authorship contribution statement  Rui Li:   Writing   –   original draft, Methodology, Investigation, Data curation.   Ming-yi Lu:   Visualization, Formal analysis.   Rong-bo Guo:  Writing   –   review   &   editing.   Haoran Duan:   Writing   –   review   &   editing.  Bing-jie Ni:   Writing   –   review   &   editing.   Shan-fei Fu:   Writing   –   review   &  editing, Methodology, Conceptualization.  Declaration of competing interest  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.  Data availability  Data will be made available on request.  Acknowledgments  This paper was supported by the Jilin Province-Academy of Sciences Science and Technology Cooperation High-Tech Industrialization Spe -  cial Project (2024SYHZ0002), Taishan Scholars Program, Natural Sci -  ence   Foundation   of   Shandong   Province   (ZR2023QD002),   and Postdoctoral Fellowship Program of CPSF (GZC20232810).  Supplementary materials  Supplementary material associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at   doi:10.1016/j.watres.2024.122529 .  References  Arezes, P.M., Bernardo, C.A., Ribeiro, E., Dias, H., 2014. Implications of wind power generation: exposure to wind turbine noise. Procedia - Soc. Behav. Sci. 109, 390 – 395 .  Badza, T., Tesfamariam, E.H., Cogger, C.G., 2020. Agricultural use suitability assessment and characterization of municipal liquid sludge: based on South Africa survey. Sci. Total Environ. 721, 137658 .  Bai, Q., Huang, C., Ma, S., Gong, B., Ou, J., 2023. Rapid adsorption and detection of copper ions in water by dual-functional ion-imprinted polymers doping with carbon dots. Sep. Purif. Technol. 315, 123666 .  Delanka-Pedige, H.M.K., Munasinghe-Arachchige, S.P., Abeysiriwardana-Arachchige, I.S. A., Nirmalakhandan, N., 2021. Wastewater infrastructure for sustainable cities: assessment based on UN sustainable development goals (SDGs). Int. J. Sustain. Dev. World Ecol. 28 (3), 203 – 209 .  Di Capua, F., Pirozzi, F., Lens, P.N.L., Esposito, G., 2019. Electron donors for autotrophic denitrification. Chem. Eng. J. 362, 922 – 937 .  Du, W.-J., Lu, J.-Y., Hu, Y.-R., Xiao, J., Yang, C., Wu, J., Huang, B., Cui, S., Wang, Y., Li, W.-W., 2023. Spatiotemporal pattern of greenhouse gas emissions in China ’ s wastewater sector and pathways towards carbon neutrality. Nat. Water 1 (2), 166 – 175 .  Gahleitner, G., 2013. Hydrogen from renewable electricity: an international review of power-to-gas pilot plants for stationary applications. Int. J. Hydrogen Energy 38 (5), 2039 – 2061 .  Gong, C., Tian, H., Liao, H., Pan, N., Pan, S., Ito, A., Jain, A.K., Kou-Giesbrecht, S., Joos, F., Sun, Q., Shi, H., Vuichard, N., Zhu, Q., Peng, C., Maggi, F., Tang, F.H.M., Zaehle, S., 2024. Global net climate effects of anthropogenic reactive nitrogen. Nature 632, 557 – 563 .  Haghdan, S., Smith, G.D., 2015. Natural fiber reinforced polyester composites: a literature review. J. Reinf. Plast. Compos. 34 (14), 1179 – 1190 .  Han, H., Zhang, J., Du, S., Sun, H., Qiao, J., 2021. Robust optimal control for anaerobic- anoxic-oxic reactors. Sci. China Technol. Sci. 64 (7), 1485 – 1499 .  Huijbregts, M.A.J., Steinmann, Z.J.N., Elshout, P.M.F., Stam, G., Verones, F., Vieira, M., Zijp, M., Hollander, A., van Zelm, R., 2017. ReCiPe2016: a harmonised life cycle impact assessment method at midpoint and endpoint level. Int. J. Life Cycle Assess. 22 (2), 138 – 147 .  Jiang, M., Zhang, Y., Zheng, J., Li, H., Ma, J., Zhang, X., Wei, Q., Wang, X., Zhang, X., Wang, Z., 2022. Mechanistic insights into CO 2   pressure regulating microbial competition in a hydrogen-based membrane biofilm reactor for denitrification. Chemosphere 303, 134875 .  Kalck, P., Le Berre, C., Serp, P., 2020. Recent advances in the methanol carbonylation reaction into acetic acid. Coord. Chem. Rev. 402, 213078 .  Karakas, A., Tozum-Akgul, S., Komesli, O.T., Kaplan-Bekaroglu, S.S., 2024. Carbon footprint analysis of advanced biological wastewater treatment plant. J. Water Process. Eng. 61, 105254 .  Karanasios, K.A., Vasiliadou, I.A., Pavlou, S., Vayenas, D.V., 2010. Hydrogenotrophic denitrification of potable water: a review. J. Hazard. Mater. 180 (1), 20 – 37 .  Lan, Z., Zhang, Y., Liang, R., Wang, Z., Sun, J., Lu, X., He, Y., Wang, Y., 2024. Comprehensive comparison of integrated fixed-film activated sludge (IFAS) and AAO activated sludge methods: influence of different operational parameters. Chemosphere 357, 142068 .  Lei, S., Zhang, J., Hu, B., Zhao, J., Yang, W., Shi, B., Chen, Y., Zhao, J., 2023. Improving nutrients removal of Anaerobic-Anoxic-Oxic process via inhibiting partial anaerobic mixture with nitrite in side-stream tanks: role of nitric oxide. Bioresour. Technol. 382, 129207 .  Li, D., Qin, J., Hong, J., 2024. Toward a comprehensive life cycle aquatic ecotoxicity assessment via machine learning: application to coal power generation in China. J. Clean. Prod. 445, 141373 .  Li, J., Wang, Z., Wang, Y., 2023. Integrating membrane aerated biofilm reactors with biological nitrogen removal processes: a new paradigm for achieving sustainable wastewater treatment plants. Chem. Eng. J 475, 146025 .  Litheko, A., Oboirien, B., Patel, B., 2023. Life cycle assessment of power-to-gas (PtG) technology — Evaluation of system configurations of renewable hydrogen and methane production. Sustain. Energy Technol. Assess. 60, 103527 .  Liu, F., Xin, L., Tang, H., Qin, Y., Zhang, L., Dong, X., Zhang, Y., Wu, W., Wang, L., 2023. Regionalized life-cycle monetization can support the transition to sustainable rural food waste management in China. Nat. Food 4 (9), 797 – 809 .  Liu, J.J., Sprecher, D., Merkt, F., Salumbides, E.J. and Ubachs, W. 2012 Determination of the Ionization and Dissociation Energies of H2 and He2, pp. 495 – 498.  Lu, L., Guest, J.S., Peters, C.A., Zhu, X., Rau, G.H., Ren, Z.J., 2018. Wastewater treatment for carbon capture and utilization. Nat. Sustain. 1 (12), 750 – 758 .  Lu, M., Zhao, F., Qin, F., Zhang, F., Feng, Q., Guo, R., 2024. Novel flocking materials as biocarriers in moving bed biofilm reactor for improving simultaneous nitrification and denitrification performance. Bioresour. Technol. 396, 130430 .  Ma, X., Zhai, Y., Zhang, T., Yao, X., Hong, J., 2023. What changes can solar and wind power bring to the electrification of China compared with coal electricity: from a cost-oriented life cycle impact perspective. Energy Convers. Manag. 289, 117162 .  Martín-Espejo, J.L., Gandara-Loe, J., Odriozola, J.A., Reina, T.R., Pastor-P  ́ erez, L., 2022. Sustainable routes for acetic acid production: traditional processes vs a low-carbon, biogas-based strategy. Sci. Total Environ. 840, 156663 .  Mohseni-Bandpi, A., Elliott, D.J., Momeny-Mazdeh, A., 1999. Denitrification of groundwater using acetic acid as a carbon source. Water Sci. Technol. 40 (2), 53 – 59 .  Morozovska, K., Bragone, F., Svensson, A.X., Shukla, D.A., Hellstenius, E., 2024. Trade- offs of wind power production: a study on the environmental implications of raw materials mining in the life cycle of wind turbines. J. Clean. Prod. 460, 142578 .  Park, J., Kang, S., Kim, S., Kim, H., Cho, H.-S., Lee, J.H., 2024. Enhancing the economic viability and reliability of renewables based electricity supply through power-to-gas- to-power with green hydrogen. Energy Convers. Manag. 310, 118485 .  Qin, Y., Zhou, M., Hao, Y., Huang, X., Tong, D., Huang, L., Zhang, C., Cheng, J., Gu, W., Wang, L., He, X., Zhou, D., Chen, Q., Ding, A., Zhu, T., 2024. Amplified positive effects on air quality, health, and renewable energy under China ’ s carbon neutral target. Nat. Geosci. 17 (5), 411 – 418 .  Qu, S., Hu, Y., Wei, R., Yu, K., Liu, Z., Zhou, Q., Wang, C., Zhang, L., 2024. Carbon footprint drivers in China ’ s municipal wastewater treatment plants and mitigation opportunities through electricity and chemical efficiency. Engineering. https://doi. org/10.1016/j.eng.2024.01.021.  Rani, P., Parkash, V., Sharma, N.K., 2024. Technological aspects, utilization and impact on power system for distributed generation: a comprehensive survey. Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 192, 114257 .  Rasheed, R., Tahir, F., Yasar, A., Sharif, F., Tabinda, A.B., Ahmad, S.R., Wang, Y., Su, Y., 2022. Environmental life cycle analysis of a modern commercial-scale fibreglass composite-based biogas scrubbing system. Renew. Energy 185, 1261 – 1271 .  Rashid, S.S., Harun, S.N., Hanafiah, M.M., Razman, K.K., Liu, Y.-Q. and Tholibon, D.A. 2023 Life cycle assessment and its application in wastewater treatment: a brief overview.  Rittmann, B.E., 2018. Biofilms, active substrata, and me. Water Res. 132, 135 – 145 .  Siagian, U.W.R., Friatnasary, D.L., Khoiruddin, K., Reynard, R., Qiu, G., Ting, Y.-P., Wenten, I.G., 2024. Membrane-aerated biofilm reactor (MABR): recent advances and challenges. Rev. Chem. Eng. 40 (1), 93 – 122 .  Song, D., Gao, J., Li, X., Lu, L., 2014. Evaluation of aging behavior of polypropylene in natural environment by principal component analysis. Polym. Test. 33, 131 – 137 .  Su, Q., Schittich, A.R., Jensen, M.M., Ng, H., Smets, B.F., 2021. Role of ammonia oxidation in organic micropollutant transformation during wastewater treatment: insights from molecular, cellular, and community level observations. Environ. Sci. Technol. 55 (4), 2173 – 2188 .  R. Li et al.   Water   Research   267   (2024)   122529  7
Sun, M., Feng, C., Zhang, J., 2020. Probabilistic solar power forecasting based on weather scenario generation. Appl. Energy 266, 114823 .  Wang, J., Chon, K., Ren, X., Kou, Y., Chae, K.-J., Piao, Y., 2019. Effects of beneficial microorganisms on nutrient removal and excess sludge production in an anaerobic- anoxic/oxic (A 2 O) process for municipal wastewater treatment. Bioresour. Technol. 281, 90 – 98 .  Wu, J., Yin, Y., Wang, J., 2018. Hydrogen-based membrane biofilm reactors for nitrate removal from water and wastewater. Int. J. Hydrogen Energy 43 (1), 1 – 15 .  Zhang, C., Zhang, L., Liu, J., Li, X., Zhang, Q., Peng, Y., 2024a. Achieving ultra-high nitrogen and phosphorus removal from real municipal wastewater in a novel continuous-flow anaerobic/aerobic/anoxic process via partial nitrification, endogenous denitrification and nitrite-type denitrifying phosphorus removal. Water Res. 250, 121046 .  Zhang, M., Liu, J., Wang, D., Lu, M., Fan, Y., Ji, J., Wu, J., 2024b. Combined effects of carbon source and C/N ratio on the partial denitrification performance: nitrite accumulation, denitrification kinetic and microbial transition. J. Environ. Chem. Eng. 12 (5), 113343 .  Zhang, X., Schwarze, M., Schom  ̈ acker, R., van de Krol, R., Abdi, F.F., 2023. Life cycle net energy assessment of sustainable H 2   production and hydrogenation of chemicals in a coupled photoelectrochemical device. Nat. Commun. 14 (1), 991 .  Zjaci  ́ c, J.P., Katan ˇ ci  ́ c, Z., Kovacic, M., Kusic, H., Hrnjak Murgi  ́ c, Z., Dionysiou, D.D., Karamanis, P., Loncaric Bozic, A., 2024. Fragmentation of polypropylene into microplastics promoted by photo-aging; release of metals, toxicity and inhibition of biodegradability. Sci. Total Environ. 935, 173344 .  R. Li et al.   Water   Research   267   (2024)   122529  8
